Produced by Curtis Weyant, Martin Pettit and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
London and Felling-on-Tyne New York and Melbourne
John Stuart Mill was born on 20th May 1806.
It is idle to speculate on the possible results of a different treatment.
Mill remained delicate throughout his life, but was endowed with that intense mental energy which is so often combined with physical weakness.
His youth was sacrificed to an idea; he was designed by his father to carry on his work; the individuality of the boy was unimportant.
A visit to the south of France at the age of fourteen, in company with the family of General Sir Samuel Bentham, was not without its influence.
It was a glimpse of another atmosphere, though the studious habits of his home life were maintained.
Moreover, he derived from it his interest in foreign politics, which remained one of his characteristics to the end of his life.
In 1823 he was appointed junior clerk in the Examiners' Office at the India House.
From that time forward his literary work was uninterrupted save by attacks of illness.
He wrote articles on an infinite variety of subjects, political, metaphysical, philosophic, religious, poetical.
And all the while he was engaged in studying and preparing for his more ambitious works, while he rose step by step at the India Office.
In 1844 appeared the article on Michelet, which its author anticipated would cause some discussion, but which did not create the sensation he expected.
These years were very much influenced by his friendship and correspondence with Comte, a curious comradeship between men of such different temperament.
The year 1856 saw him head of the Examiners' Office in the India House, and another two years brought the end of his official work, owing to the transfer of India to the Crown.
Seven years after the death of his wife, Mill was invited to contest Westminster.
His feeling on the conduct of elections made him refuse to take any personal action in the matter, and he gave the frankest expression to his political views, but nevertheless he was elected by a large majority.
He was not a conventional success in the House; as a speaker he lacked magnetism.
But his influence was widely felt. "For the sake of the House of Commons at large," said Mr.
Gladstone, "I rejoiced in his advent and deplored his disappearance.
He did us all good." After only three years in Parliament, he was defeated at the next General Election by Mr.
He retired to Avignon, to the pleasant little house where the happiest years of his life had been spent in the companionship of his wife, and continued his disinterested labours.
A book on Socialism was under consideration, but, like an earlier study of Sociology, it never was written.
He died in 1873, his last years being spent peacefully in the pleasant society of his step-daughter, from whose tender care and earnest intellectual sympathy he caught maybe a far-off reflection of the light which had irradiated his spiritual life.
Mill was introduced to her as early as 1831, at a dinner-party at Mr.
Taylor's house, where were present, amongst others, Roebuck, W.
The acquaintance rapidly ripened into intimacy and the intimacy into friendship, and Mill was never weary of expatiating on all the advantages of so singular a relationship.
The facts of this remarkable intimacy can easily be stated.
There is no question that Mill's infatuation was the cause of considerable trouble to his acquaintances and friends.
His father openly taxed him with being in love with another man's wife.
Austin, Miss Harriet Martineau were amongst those who suffered because they made some allusion to a forbidden subject.
Taylor lived with her daughter in a lodging in the country; but in 1851 her husband died, and then Mill made her his wife.
Opinions were widely divergent as to her merits; but every one agreed that up to the time of her death, in 1858, Mill was wholly lost to his friends.
George Mill, one of Mill's younger brothers, gave it as his opinion that she was a clever and remarkable woman, but "nothing like what John took her to be." Carlyle, in his reminiscences, described her with ambiguous epithets.
Carlyle said on one occasion that "she is thought to be dangerous," and that Carlyle added that she was worse than dangerous, she was patronising.
The occasion when Mill and his wife were brought into close contact with the Carlyles is well known.
Mill and his wife drove up to Carlyle's door, the wife speechless, the husband so full of conversation that he detained Carlyle with desperate attempts at loquacity for two hours.
Mill, as I have said, died in 1858, after seven years of happy companionship with her husband, and was buried at Avignon.
As earnest for all public good as she was generous and devoted to all who surrounded her, her influence has been felt in many of the greatest improvements of the age, and will be in those still to come.
Every one will judge for himself of this romantic episode in Mill's career, according to such experience as he may possess of the philosophic mind and of the value of these curious but not infrequent relationships.
It may have been a piece of infatuation, or, if we prefer to say so, it may have been the most gracious and the most human page in Mill's career.
Mill may have flattered her husband's vanity by echoing his opinions, or she may have indeed been an Egeria, full of inspiration and intellectual helpfulness.
What usually happens in these cases,--although the philosopher himself, through his belief in the equality of the sexes, was debarred from thinking so,--is the extremely valuable action and reaction of two different classes and orders of mind.
To any one whose thoughts have been occupied with the sphere of abstract speculation, the lively and vivid presentment of concrete fact comes as a delightful and agreeable shock.
The instinct of the woman often enables her not only to apprehend but to illustrate a truth for which she would be totally unable to give the adequate philosophic reasoning.
Thus both parties to the happy contract are equally pleased.
The abstract truth gets the concrete illustration; the concrete illustration finds its proper foundation in a series of abstract inquiries.
Perhaps Carlyle's epithets of "iridescent" and "vivid" refer incidentally to Mrs.
Mill's quick perceptiveness, and thus throw a useful light on the mutual advantages of the common work of husband and wife.
But it savours almost of impertinence even to attempt to lift the veil on a mystery like this.
It is enough to say, perhaps, that however much we may deplore the exaggeration of Mill's references to his wife, we recognise that, for whatever reason, the pair lived an ideally happy life.
It still, however, remains to estimate the extent to which Mrs.
Taylor, both before and after her marriage with Mill, made actual contributions to his thoughts and his public work.
When first he knew her, his thoughts were turning to the subject of Logic.
But his published work on the subject owed nothing to her, he tells us, in its doctrines.
It was Mill's custom to write the whole of a book so as to get his general scheme complete, and then laboriously to re-write it in order to perfect the phrases and the composition.
Taylor was of considerable help to him as a critic of style.
But to be a critic of doctrine she was hardly qualified.
There is a curiously humble estimate of his own powers (to which Dr.
And to most men logic and metaphysics may be safely taken as forming a domain in which originality of thought, if it can be honestly professed, is a sufficient title of distinction.
Here, as elsewhere, Mill thinks out the matter by himself; the concrete form of the thoughts is suggested or prompted by the wife.
Apart from this "general tone," Mill tells us that there was a specific contribution. "The chapter which has had a greater influence on opinion than all the rest, that on the Probable Future of the Labouring Classes, is entirely due to her.
In the first draft of the book that chapter did not exist.
Nor, again, is it, on the face of it, consistent with those doctrines of individual liberty which, aided by the intellectual companionship of his wife, he propounded in a later work.
Perhaps a slight visionariness of speculation was no less the attribute of Mrs.
Mill than an absence of rigid logical principles.
Be this as it may, she undoubtedly checked the half-recognised leanings of her husband in the direction of Coleridge and Carlyle.
It is true that Mill had before learnt that men and women ought to be equal in legal, political, social, and domestic relations.
Taylor had actually written on this very point, and the warmth and fervour of Mill's denunciations of women's servitude were unmistakably caught from his wife's view of the practical disabilities entailed by the feminine position.
In many of his speculations John Stuart Mill forms a sort of connecting link between the doctrines of the earlier English empirical school and those which we associate with the name of Mr.
This is hardly the view of the nineteenth century.
It is possible that logically the individual is prior to the State; historically and in the order of Nature, the State is prior to the individual.
In other words, such rights as every single personality possesses in a modern world do not belong to him by an original ordinance of Nature, but are slowly acquired in the growth and development of the social state.
It is not the truth that individual liberties were forfeited by some deliberate act when men made themselves into a Commonwealth.
But if this is even approximately true, it seriously restricts that liberty of the individual for which Mill pleads.
The individual has no chance, because he has no rights, against the social organism.
Society can punish him for acts or even opinions which are anti-social in character.
His virtue lies in recognising the intimate communion with his fellows.
His sphere of activity is bounded by the common interest.
Auguste Comte, is so familiar and possibly so damaging to the individual initiative, that it becomes necessary to advance and proclaim the truth which resides in an opposite theory.
All progress, as we are aware, depends on the joint process of integration and differentiation; synthesis, analysis, and then a larger synthesis seem to form the law of development.
The omnipotence of Society means a dead level of uniformity.
The claim of the individual to be heard, to say what he likes, to do what he likes, to live as he likes, is absolutely necessary, not only for the variety of elements without which life is poor, but also for the hope of a future age.
What his wife really was to Mill, we shall, perhaps, never know.
But that she was an actual and vivid force, which roused the latent enthusiasm of his nature, we have abundant evidence.
And when she died at Avignon, though his friends may have regained an almost estranged companionship, Mill was, personally, the poorer.
Into the sorrow of that bereavement we cannot enter: we have no right or power to draw the veil.
It is enough to quote the simple words, so eloquent of an unspoken grief--"I can say nothing which could describe, even in the faintest manner, what that loss was and is.
But because I know that she would have wished it, I endeavour to make the best of what life I have left, and to work for her purposes with such diminished strength as can be derived from thoughts of her, and communion with her memory."
A question seldom stated, and hardly ever discussed, in general terms, but which profoundly influences the practical controversies of the age by its latent presence, and is likely soon to make itself recognised as the vital question of the future.
The struggle between Liberty and Authority is the most conspicuous feature in the portions of history with which we are earliest familiar, particularly in that of Greece, Rome, and England.
But in old times this contest was between subjects, or some classes of subjects, and the government.
By liberty, was meant protection against the tyranny of the political rulers.
The rulers were conceived (except in some of the popular governments of Greece) as in a necessarily antagonistic position to the people whom they ruled.
Their power was regarded as necessary, but also as highly dangerous; as a weapon which they would attempt to use against their subjects, no less than against external enemies.
To prevent the weaker members of the community from being preyed upon by innumerable vultures, it was needful that there should be an animal of prey stronger than the rest, commissioned to keep them down.
But as the king of the vultures would be no less bent upon preying on the flock than any of the minor harpies, it was indispensable to be in a perpetual attitude of defence against his beak and claws.
The aim, therefore, of patriots, was to set limits to the power which the ruler should be suffered to exercise over the community; and this limitation was what they meant by liberty.
To the first of these modes of limitation, the ruling power, in most European countries, was compelled, more or less, to submit.
It was not so with the second; and to attain this, or when already in some degree possessed, to attain it more completely, became everywhere the principal object of the lovers of liberty.
And so long as mankind were content to combat one enemy by another, and to be ruled by a master, on condition of being guaranteed more or less efficaciously against his tyranny, they did not carry their aspirations beyond this point.
A time, however, came, in the progress of human affairs, when men ceased to think it a necessity of nature that their governors should be an independent power, opposed in interest to themselves.
It appeared to them much better that the various magistrates of the State should be their tenants or delegates, revocable at their pleasure.
In that way alone, it seemed, could they have complete security that the powers of government would never be abused to their disadvantage.
By degrees, this new demand for elective and temporary rulers became the prominent object of the exertions of the popular party, wherever any such party existed; and superseded, to a considerable extent, the previous efforts to limit the power of rulers.
What was now wanted was, that the rulers should be identified with the people; that their interest and will should be the interest and will of the nation.
The nation did not need to be protected against its own will.
There was no fear of its tyrannising over itself.
Let the rulers be effectually responsible to it, promptly removable by it, and it could afford to trust them with power of which it could itself dictate the use to be made.
Their power was but the nation's own power, concentrated, and in a form convenient for exercise.
This mode of thought, or rather perhaps of feeling, was common among the last generation of European liberalism, in the Continental section of which it still apparently predominates.
Those who admit any limit to what a government may do, except in the case of such governments as they think ought not to exist, stand out as brilliant exceptions among the political thinkers of the Continent.
A similar tone of sentiment might by this time have been prevalent in our own country, if the circumstances which for a time encouraged it, had continued unaltered.
But, in political and philosophical theories, as well as in persons, success discloses faults and infirmities which failure might have concealed from observation.
The notion, that the people have no need to limit their power over themselves, might seem axiomatic, when popular government was a thing only dreamed about, or read of as having existed at some distant period of the past.
It was now perceived that such phrases as "self-government," and "the power of the people over themselves," do not express the true state of the case.
The "people" who exercise the power are not always the same people with those over whom it is exercised; and the "self-government" spoken of is not the government of each by himself, but of each by all the rest.
The limitation, therefore, of the power of government over individuals, loses none of its importance when the holders of power are regularly accountable to the community, that is, to the strongest party therein.
Like other tyrannies, the tyranny of the majority was at first, and is still vulgarly, held in dread, chiefly as operating through the acts of the public authorities.
But reflecting persons perceived that when society is itself the tyrant--society collectively, over the separate individuals who compose it--its means of tyrannising are not restricted to the acts which it may do by the hands of its political functionaries.
All that makes existence valuable to any one, depends on the enforcement of restraints upon the actions of other people.
Some rules of conduct, therefore, must be imposed, by law in the first place, and by opinion on many things which are not fit subjects for the operation of law.
What these rules should be, is the principal question in human affairs; but if we except a few of the most obvious cases, it is one of those which least progress has been made in resolving.
No two ages, and scarcely any two countries, have decided it alike; and the decision of one age or country is a wonder to another.
Yet the people of any given age and country no more suspect any difficulty in it, than if it were a subject on which mankind had always been agreed.
The rules which obtain among themselves appear to them self-evident and self-justifying.
This all but universal illusion is one of the examples of the magical influence of custom, which is not only, as the proverb says, a second nature, but is continually mistaken for the first.
People are accustomed to believe, and have been encouraged in the belief by some who aspire to the character of philosophers, that their feelings, on subjects of this nature, are better than reasons, and render reasons unnecessary.
The practical principle which guides them to their opinions on the regulation of human conduct, is the feeling in each person's mind that everybody should be required to act as he, and those with whom he sympathises, would like them to act.
Men's opinions, accordingly, on what is laudable or blamable, are affected by all the multifarious causes which influence their wishes in regard to the conduct of others, and which are as numerous as those which determine their wishes on any other subject.
Wherever there is an ascendant class, a large portion of the morality of the country emanates from its class interests, and its feelings of class superiority.
Where, on the other hand, a class, formerly ascendant, has lost its ascendancy, or where its ascendancy is unpopular, the prevailing moral sentiments frequently bear the impress of an impatient dislike of superiority.
Another grand determining principle of the rules of conduct, both in act and forbearance, which have been enforced by law or opinion, has been the servility of mankind towards the supposed preferences or aversions of their temporal masters, or of their gods.
This servility, though essentially selfish, is not hypocrisy; it gives rise to perfectly genuine sentiments of abhorrence; it made men burn magicians and heretics.
The likings and dislikings of society, or of some powerful portion of it, are thus the main thing which has practically determined the rules laid down for general observance, under the penalties of law or opinion.
And in general, those who have been in advance of society in thought and feeling have left this condition of things unassailed in principle, however they may have come into conflict with it in some of its details.
They have occupied themselves rather in inquiring what things society ought to like or dislike, than in questioning whether its likings or dislikings should be a law to individuals.
They preferred endeavouring to alter the feelings of mankind on the particular points on which they were themselves heretical, rather than make common cause in defence of freedom, with heretics generally.
Those who first broke the yoke of what called itself the Universal Church, were in general as little willing to permit difference of religious opinion as that church itself.
It is accordingly on this battle-field, almost solely, that the rights of the individual against society have been asserted on broad grounds of principle, and the claim of society to exercise authority over dissentients, openly controverted.
The great writers to whom the world owes what religious liberty it possesses, have mostly asserted freedom of conscience as an indefeasible right, and denied absolutely that a human being is accountable to others for his religious belief.
In the minds of almost all religious persons, even in the most tolerant countries, the duty of toleration is admitted with tacit reserves.
Wherever the sentiment of the majority is still genuine and intense, it is found to have abated little of its claim to be obeyed.
The majority have not yet learnt to feel the power of the government their power, or its opinions their opinions.
When they do so, individual liberty will probably be as much exposed to invasion from the government, as it already is from public opinion.
There is, in fact, no recognised principle by which the propriety or impropriety of government interference is customarily tested.
People decide according to their personal preferences.
And it seems to me that in consequence of this absence of rule or principle, one side is at present as often wrong as the other; the interference of government is, with about equal frequency, improperly invoked and improperly condemned.
That principle is, that the sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering with the liberty of action of any of their number, is self-protection.
That the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilised community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others.
His own good, either physical or moral, is not a sufficient warrant.
He cannot rightfully be compelled to do or forbear because it will be better for him to do so, because it will make him happier, because, in the opinions of others, to do so would be wise, or even right.
These are good reasons for remonstrating with him, or reasoning with him, or persuading him, or entreating him, but not for compelling him, or visiting him with any evil in case he do otherwise.
To justify that, the conduct from which it is desired to deter him must be calculated to produce evil to some one else.
The only part of the conduct of any one, for which he is amenable to society, is that which concerns others.
In the part which merely concerns himself, his independence is, of right, absolute.
Over himself, over his own body and mind, the individual is sovereign.
It is, perhaps, hardly necessary to say that this doctrine is meant to apply only to human beings in the maturity of their faculties.
We are not speaking of children, or of young persons below the age which the law may fix as that of manhood or womanhood.
Those who are still in a state to require being taken care of by others, must be protected against their own actions as well as against external injury.
For the same reason, we may leave out of consideration those backward states of society in which the race itself may be considered as in its nonage.
Despotism is a legitimate mode of government in dealing with barbarians, provided the end be their improvement, and the means justified by actually effecting that end.
Liberty, as a principle, has no application to any state of things anterior to the time when mankind have become capable of being improved by free and equal discussion.
Until then, there is nothing for them but implicit obedience to an Akbar or a Charlemagne, if they are so fortunate as to find one.
It is proper to state that I forego any advantage which could be derived to my argument from the idea of abstract right, as a thing independent of utility.
I regard utility as the ultimate appeal on all ethical questions; but it must be utility in the largest sense, grounded on the permanent interests of man as a progressive being.
Those interests, I contend, authorise the subjection of individual spontaneity to external control, only in respect to those actions of each, which concern the interest of other people.
A person may cause evil to others not only by his actions but by his inaction, and in either case he is justly accountable to them for the injury.
The latter case, it is true, requires a much more cautious exercise of compulsion than the former.
To make any one answerable for doing evil to others, is the rule; to make him answerable for not preventing evil, is, comparatively speaking, the exception.
Yet there are many cases clear enough and grave enough to justify that exception.
This, then, is the appropriate region of human liberty.
No society in which these liberties are not, on the whole, respected, is free, whatever may be its form of government; and none is completely free in which they do not exist absolute and unqualified.
The only freedom which deserves the name, is that of pursuing our own good in our own way, so long as we do not attempt to deprive others of theirs, or impede their efforts to obtain it.
Each is the proper guardian of his own health, whether bodily, or mental and spiritual.
Mankind are greater gainers by suffering each other to live as seems good to themselves, than by compelling each to live as seems good to the rest.
Though this doctrine is anything but new, and, to some persons, may have the air of a truism, there is no doctrine which stands more directly opposed to the general tendency of existing opinion and practice.
Society has expended fully as much effort in the attempt (according to its lights) to compel people to conform to its notions of personal, as of social excellence.
And some of those modern reformers who have placed themselves in strongest opposition to the religions of the past, have been noway behind either churches or sects in their assertion of the right of spiritual domination: M.
This one branch is the Liberty of Thought: from which it is impossible to separate the cognate liberty of speaking and of writing.
Those grounds, when rightly understood, are of much wider application than to only one division of the subject, and a thorough consideration of this part of the question will be found the best introduction to the remainder.
Those to whom nothing which I am about to say will be new, may therefore, I hope, excuse me, if on a subject which for now three centuries has been so often discussed, I venture on one discussion more.
The time, it is to be hoped, is gone by, when any defence would be necessary of the "liberty of the press" as one of the securities against corrupt or tyrannical government.
No argument, we may suppose, can now be needed, against permitting a legislature or an executive, not identified in interest with the people, to prescribe opinions to them, and determine what doctrines or what arguments they shall be allowed to hear.
This aspect of the question, besides, has been so often and so triumphantly enforced by preceding writers, that it need not be specially insisted on in this place.
Let us suppose, therefore, that the government is entirely at one with the people, and never thinks of exerting any power of coercion unless in agreement with what it conceives to be their voice.
But I deny the right of the people to exercise such coercion, either by themselves or by their government.
The best government has no more title to it than the worst.
It is as noxious, or more noxious, when exerted in accordance with public opinion, than when in or opposition to it.
If all mankind minus one, were of one opinion, and only one person were of the contrary opinion, mankind would be no more justified in silencing that one person, than he, if he had the power, would be justified in silencing mankind.
Were an opinion a personal possession of no value except to the owner; if to be obstructed in the enjoyment of it were simply a private injury, it would make some difference whether the injury was inflicted only on a few persons or on many.
But the peculiar evil of silencing the expression of an opinion is, that it is robbing the human race; posterity as well as the existing generation; those who dissent from the opinion, still more than those who hold it.
If the opinion is right, they are deprived of the opportunity of exchanging error for truth: if wrong, they lose, what is almost as great a benefit, the clearer perception and livelier impression of truth, produced by its collision with error.
It is necessary to consider separately these two hypotheses, each of which has a distinct branch of the argument corresponding to it.
We can never be sure that the opinion we are endeavouring to stifle is a false opinion; and if we were sure, stifling it would be an evil still.
First: the opinion which it is attempted to suppress by authority may possibly be true.
Those who desire to suppress it, of course deny its truth; but they are not infallible.
They have no authority to decide the question for all mankind, and exclude every other person from the means of judging.
All silencing of discussion is an assumption of infallibility.
Its condemnation may be allowed to rest on this common argument, not the worse for being common.
Absolute princes, or others who are accustomed to unlimited deference, usually feel this complete confidence in their own opinions on nearly all subjects.
Nor is his faith in this collective authority at all shaken by his being aware that other ages, countries, sects, churches, classes, and parties have thought, and even now think, the exact reverse.
The objection likely to be made to this argument, would probably take some such form as the following.
There is no greater assumption of infallibility in forbidding the propagation of error, than in any other thing which is done by public authority on its own judgment and responsibility.
Judgment is given to men that they may use it.
Because it may be used erroneously, are men to be told that they ought not to use it at all?
To prohibit what they think pernicious, is not claiming exemption from error, but fulfilling the duty incumbent on them, although fallible, of acting on their conscientious conviction.
If we were never to act on our opinions, because those opinions may be wrong, we should leave all our interests uncared for, and all our duties unperformed.
An objection which applies to all conduct, can be no valid objection to any conduct in particular.
It is the duty of governments, and of individuals, to form the truest opinions they can; to form them carefully, and never impose them upon others unless they are quite sure of being right.
Let us take care, it may be said, not to make the same mistake: but governments and nations have made mistakes in other things, which are not denied to be fit subjects for the exercise of authority: they have laid on bad taxes, made unjust wars.
Ought we therefore to lay on no taxes, and, under whatever provocation, make no wars?
Men, and governments, must act to the best of their ability.
There is no such thing as absolute certainty, but there is assurance sufficient for the purposes of human life.
We may, and must, assume our opinion to be true for the guidance of our own conduct: and it is assuming no more when we forbid bad men to pervert society by the propagation of opinions which we regard as false and pernicious.
I answer that it is assuming very much more.
There is the greatest difference between presuming an opinion to be true, because, with every opportunity for contesting it, it has not been refuted, and assuming its truth for the purpose of not permitting its refutation.
Complete liberty of contradicting and disproving our opinion, is the very condition which justifies us in assuming its truth for purposes of action; and on no other terms can a being with human faculties have any rational assurance of being right.
When we consider either the history of opinion, or the ordinary conduct of human life, to what is it to be ascribed that the one and the other are no worse than they are?
Why is it, then, that there is on the whole a preponderance among mankind of rational opinions and rational conduct?
He is capable of rectifying his mistakes, by discussion and experience.
There must be discussion, to show how experience is to be interpreted.
Wrong opinions and practices gradually yield to fact and argument: but facts and arguments, to produce any effect on the mind, must be brought before it.
Very few facts are able to tell their own story, without comments to bring out their meaning.
The whole strength and value, then, of human judgment, depending on the one property, that it can be set right when it is wrong, reliance can be placed on it only when the means of setting it right are kept constantly at hand.
In the case of any person whose judgment is really deserving of confidence, how has it become so?
Because he has kept his mind open to criticism of his opinions and conduct.
Because it has been his practice to listen to all that could be said against him; to profit by as much of it as was just, and expound to himself, and upon occasion to others, the fallacy of what was fallacious.
No wise man ever acquired his wisdom in any mode but this; nor is it in the nature of human intellect to become wise in any other manner.
If even the Newtonian philosophy were not permitted to be questioned, mankind could not feel as complete assurance of its truth as they now do.
The beliefs which we have most warrant for, have no safeguard to rest on, but a standing invitation to the whole world to prove them unfounded.
This is the amount of certainty attainable by a fallible being, and this the sole way of attaining it.
Strange it is, that men should admit the validity of the arguments for free discussion, but object to their being "pushed to an extreme;" not seeing that unless the reasons are good for an extreme case, they are not good for any case.
To call any proposition certain, while there is any one who would deny its certainty if permitted, but who is not permitted, is to assume that we ourselves, and those who agree with us, are the judges of certainty, and judges without hearing the other side.
There are, it is alleged, certain beliefs, so useful, not to say indispensable to well-being, that it is as much the duty of governments to uphold those beliefs, as to protect any other of the interests of society.
In a case of such necessity, and so directly in the line of their duty, something less than infallibility may, it is maintained, warrant, and even bind, governments, to act on their own opinion, confirmed by the general opinion of mankind.
It is also often argued, and still oftener thought, that none but bad men would desire to weaken these salutary beliefs; and there can be nothing wrong, it is thought, in restraining bad men, and prohibiting what only such men would wish to practise.
This mode of thinking makes the justification of restraints on discussion not a question of the truth of doctrines, but of their usefulness; and flatters itself by that means to escape the responsibility of claiming to be an infallible judge of opinions.
But those who thus satisfy themselves, do not perceive that the assumption of infallibility is merely shifted from one point to another.
The usefulness of an opinion is itself matter of opinion: as disputable, as open to discussion, and requiring discussion as much, as the opinion itself.
There is the same need of an infallible judge of opinions to decide an opinion to be noxious, as to decide it to be false, unless the opinion condemned has full opportunity of defending itself.
And it will not do to say that the heretic may be allowed to maintain the utility or harmlessness of his opinion, though forbidden to maintain its truth.
The truth of an opinion is part of its utility.
If we would know whether or not it is desirable that a proposition should be believed, is it possible to exclude the consideration of whether or not it is true?
There can be no fair discussion of the question of usefulness, when an argument so vital may be employed on one side, but not on the other.
And in point of fact, when law or public feeling do not permit the truth of an opinion to be disputed, they are just as little tolerant of a denial of its usefulness.
The utmost they allow is an extenuation of its absolute necessity, or of the positive guilt of rejecting it.
Let the opinions impugned be the belief in a God and in a future state, or any of the commonly received doctrines of morality.
Is the belief in a God one of the opinions, to feel sure of which, you hold to be assuming infallibility?
But I must be permitted to observe, that it is not the feeling sure of a doctrine (be it what it may) which I call an assumption of infallibility.
And I denounce and reprobate this pretension not the less, if put forth on the side of my most solemn convictions.
And so far from the assumption being less objectionable or less dangerous because the opinion is called immoral or impious, this is the case of all others in which it is most fatal.
These are exactly the occasions on which the men of one generation commit those dreadful mistakes, which excite the astonishment and horror of posterity.
Mankind can hardly be too often reminded that there was once a man named Socrates, between whom and the legal authorities and public opinion of his time, there took place a memorable collision.
Impiety, in denying the gods recognised by the State; indeed his accuser asserted (see the "Apologia") that he believed in no gods at all.
To pass from this to the only other instance of judicial iniquity, the mention of which, after the condemnation of Socrates, would not be an anticlimax: the event which took place on Calvary rather more than eighteen hundred years ago.
The man who left on the memory of those who witnessed his life and conversation, such an impression of his moral grandeur, that eighteen subsequent centuries have done homage to him as the Almighty in person, was ignominiously put to death, as what?
Men did not merely mistake their benefactor; they mistook him for the exact contrary of what he was, and treated him as that prodigy of impiety, which they themselves are now held to be, for their treatment of him.
The feelings with which mankind now regard these lamentable transactions, especially the later of the two, render them extremely unjust in their judgment of the unhappy actors.
Orthodox Christians who are tempted to think that those who stoned to death the first martyrs must have been worse men than they themselves are, ought to remember that one of those persecutors was Saint Paul.
Let us add one more example, the most striking of all, if the impressiveness of an error is measured by the wisdom and virtue of him who falls into it.
If ever any one, possessed of power, had grounds for thinking himself the best and most enlightened among his cotemporaries, it was the Emperor Marcus Aurelius.
Absolute monarch of the whole civilised world, he preserved through life not only the most unblemished justice, but what was less to be expected from his Stoical breeding, the tenderest heart.
The few failings which are attributed to him, were all on the side of indulgence: while his writings, the highest ethical product of the ancient mind, differ scarcely perceptibly, if they differ at all, from the most characteristic teachings of Christ.
This man, a better Christian in all but the dogmatic sense of the word, than almost any of the ostensibly Christian sovereigns who have since reigned, persecuted Christianity.
Existing society he knew to be in a deplorable state.
But such as it was, he saw, or thought he saw, that it was held together, and prevented from being worse, by belief and reverence of the received divinities.
As a ruler of mankind, he deemed it his duty not to suffer society to fall in pieces; and saw not how, if its existing ties were removed, any others could be formed which could again knit it together.
The new religion openly aimed at dissolving these ties: unless, therefore, it was his duty to adopt that religion, it seemed to be his duty to put it down.
To my mind this is one of the most tragical facts in all history.
It is a bitter thought, how different a thing the Christianity of the world might have been, if the Christian faith had been adopted as the religion of the empire under the auspices of Marcus Aurelius instead of those of Constantine.
But it would be equally unjust to him and false to truth, to deny, that no one plea which can be urged for punishing anti-Christian teaching, was wanting to Marcus Aurelius for punishing, as he did, the propagation of Christianity.
No Christian more firmly believes that Atheism is false, and tends to the dissolution of society, than Marcus Aurelius believed the same things of Christianity; he who, of all men then living, might have been thought the most capable of appreciating it.
This is a form of the argument for religious intolerance, sufficiently remarkable not to be passed without notice.
Johnson believe it to have been the most precious gift which could be bestowed on mankind.
But, indeed, the dictum that truth always triumphs over persecution, is one of those pleasant falsehoods which men repeat after one another till they pass into commonplaces, but which all experience refutes.
History teems with instances of truth put down by persecution.
If not suppressed for ever, it may be thrown back for centuries.
To speak only of religious opinions: the Reformation broke out at least twenty times before Luther, and was put down.
Even after the era of Luther, wherever persecution was persisted in, it was successful.
In Spain, Italy, Flanders, the Austrian empire, Protestantism was rooted out; and, most likely, would have been so in England, had Queen Mary lived, or Queen Elizabeth died.
Persecution has always succeeded, save where the heretics were too strong a party to be effectually persecuted.
No reasonable person can doubt that Christianity might have been extirpated in the Roman Empire.
It spread, and became predominant, because the persecutions were only occasional, lasting but a short time, and separated by long intervals of almost undisturbed propagandism.
It is a piece of idle sentimentality that truth, merely as truth, has any inherent power denied to error, of prevailing against the dungeon and the stake.
Men are not more zealous for truth than they often are for error, and a sufficient application of legal or even of social penalties will generally succeed in stopping the propagation of either.
It will be said, that we do not now put to death the introducers of new opinions: we are not like our fathers who slew the prophets, we even build sepulchres to them.
It is true we no longer put heretics to death; and the amount of penal infliction which modern feeling would probably tolerate, even against the most obnoxious opinions, is not sufficient to extirpate them.
But let us not flatter ourselves that we are yet free from the stain even of legal persecution.
Penalties for opinion, or at least for its expression, still exist by law; and their enforcement is not, even in these times, so unexampled as to make it at all incredible that they may some day be revived in full force.
The rule, besides, is suicidal, and cuts away its own foundation.
Under pretence that atheists must be liars, it admits the testimony of all atheists who are willing to lie, and rejects only those who brave the obloquy of publicly confessing a detested creed rather than affirm a falsehood.
The rule, and the theory it implies, are hardly less insulting to believers than to infidels.
For if he who does not believe in a future state, necessarily lies, it follows that they who do believe are only prevented from lying, if prevented they are, by the fear of hell.
We will not do the authors and abettors of the rule the injury of supposing, that the conception which they have formed of Christian virtue is drawn from their own consciousness.
But unhappily there is no security in the state of the public mind, that the suspension of worse forms of legal persecution, which has lasted for about the space of a generation, will continue.
In this age the quiet surface of routine is as often ruffled by attempts to resuscitate past evils, as to introduce new benefits.
For a long time past, the chief mischief of the legal penalties is that they strengthen the social stigma.
In respect to all persons but those whose pecuniary circumstances make them independent of the good will of other people, opinion, on this subject, is as efficacious as law; men might as well be imprisoned, as excluded from the means of earning their bread.
But though we do not now inflict so much evil on those who think differently from us, as it was formerly our custom to do, it may be that we do ourselves as much evil as ever by our treatment of them.
Socrates was put to death, but the Socratic philosophy rose like the sun in heaven, and spread its illumination over the whole intellectual firmament.
Christians were cast to the lions, but the Christian church grew up a stately and spreading tree, overtopping the older and less vigorous growths, and stifling them by its shade.
Our merely social intolerance kills no one, roots out no opinions, but induces men to disguise them, or to abstain from any active effort for their diffusion.
A convenient plan for having peace in the intellectual world, and keeping all things going on therein very much as they do already.
But the price paid for this sort of intellectual pacification, is the sacrifice of the entire moral courage of the human mind.
The sort of men who can be looked for under it, are either mere conformers to commonplace, or time-servers for truth, whose arguments on all great subjects are meant for their hearers, and are not those which have convinced themselves.
But it is not the minds of heretics that are deteriorated most, by the ban placed on all inquiry which does not end in the orthodox conclusions.
The greatest harm done is to those who are not heretics, and whose whole mental development is cramped, and their reason cowed, by the fear of heresy.
No one can be a great thinker who does not recognise, that as a thinker it is his first duty to follow his intellect to whatever conclusions it may lead.
Truth gains more even by the errors of one who, with due study and preparation, thinks for himself, than by the true opinions of those who only hold them because they do not suffer themselves to think.
Not that it is solely, or chiefly, to form great thinkers, that freedom of thinking is required.
On the contrary, it is as much, and even more indispensable, to enable average human beings to attain the mental stature which they are capable of.
There have been, and may again be, great individual thinkers, in a general atmosphere of mental slavery.
But there never has been, nor ever will be, in that atmosphere, an intellectually active people.
Where any people has made a temporary approach to such a character, it has been because the dread of heterodox speculation was for a time suspended.
These periods differed widely in the particular opinions which they developed; but were alike in this, that during all three the yoke of authority was broken.
In each, an old mental despotism had been thrown off, and no new one had yet taken its place.
The impulse given at these three periods has made Europe what it now is.
Every single improvement which has taken place either in the human mind or in institutions, may be traced distinctly to one or other of them.
Appearances have for some time indicated that all three impulses are well-nigh spent; and we can expect no fresh start, until we again assert our mental freedom.
Such persons, if they can once get their creed taught from authority, naturally think that no good, and some harm, comes of its being allowed to be questioned.
Waiving, however, this possibility--assuming that the true opinion abides in the mind, but abides as a prejudice, a belief independent of, and proof against, argument--this is not the way in which truth ought to be held by a rational being.
Truth, thus held, is but one superstition the more, accidentally clinging to the words which enunciate a truth.
If the cultivation of the understanding consists in one thing more than in another, it is surely in learning the grounds of one's own opinions.
Whatever people believe, on subjects on which it is of the first importance to believe rightly, they ought to be able to defend against at least the common objections.
It does not follow that opinions must be merely parroted because they are never heard controverted.
The peculiarity of the evidence of mathematical truths is, that all the argument is on one side.
There are no objections, and no answers to objections.
But on every subject on which difference of opinion is possible, the truth depends on a balance to be struck between two sets of conflicting reasons.
The greatest orator, save one, of antiquity, has left it on record that he always studied his adversary's case with as great, if not with still greater, intensity than even his own.
What Cicero practised as the means of forensic success, requires to be imitated by all who study any subject in order to arrive at the truth.
He who knows only his own side of the case, knows little of that.
His reasons may be good, and no one may have been able to refute them.
But if he is equally unable to refute the reasons on the opposite side; if he does not so much as know what they are, he has no ground for preferring either opinion.
The rational position for him would be suspension of judgment, and unless he contents himself with that, he is either led by authority, or adopts, like the generality of the world, the side to which he feels most inclination.
Nor is it enough that he should hear the arguments of adversaries from his own teachers, presented as they state them, and accompanied by what they offer as refutations.
That is not the way to do justice to the arguments, or bring them into real contact with his own mind.
He must be able to hear them from persons who actually believe them; who defend them in earnest, and do their very utmost for them.
Ninety-nine in a hundred of what are called educated men are in this condition; even of those who can argue fluently for their opinions.
To abate the force of these considerations, an enemy of free discussion may be supposed to say, that there is no necessity for mankind in general to know and understand all that can be said against or for their opinions by philosophers and theologians.
That it is not needful for common men to be able to expose all the misstatements or fallacies of an ingenious opponent.
That it is enough if there is always somebody capable of answering them, so that nothing likely to mislead uninstructed persons remains unrefuted.
Conceding to this view of the subject the utmost that can be claimed for it by those most easily satisfied with the amount of understanding of truth which ought to accompany the belief of it; even so, the argument for free discussion is no way weakened.
The Catholic Church has its own way of dealing with this embarrassing problem.
It makes a broad separation between those who can be permitted to receive its doctrines on conviction, and those who must accept them on trust.
But in countries professing Protestantism, this resource is denied; since Protestants hold, at least in theory, that the responsibility for the choice of a religion must be borne by each for himself, and cannot be thrown off upon teachers.
Besides, in the present state of the world, it is practically impossible that writings which are read by the instructed can be kept from the uninstructed.
If the teachers of mankind are to be cognisant of all that they ought to know, everything must be free to be written and published without restraint.
The fact, however, is, that not only the grounds of the opinion are forgotten in the absence of discussion, but too often the meaning of the opinion itself.
The words which convey it, cease to suggest ideas, or suggest only a small portion of those they were originally employed to communicate.
Instead of a vivid conception and a living belief, there remain only a few phrases retained by rote; or, if any part, the shell and husk only of the meaning is retained, the finer essence being lost.
The great chapter in human history which this fact occupies and fills, cannot be too earnestly studied and meditated on.
It is illustrated in the experience of almost all ethical doctrines and religious creeds.
They are all full of meaning and vitality to those who originate them, and to the direct disciples of the originators.
Their meaning continues to be felt in undiminished strength, and is perhaps brought out into even fuller consciousness, so long as the struggle lasts to give the doctrine or creed an ascendency over other creeds.
At last it either prevails, and becomes the general opinion, or its progress stops; it keeps possession of the ground it has gained, but ceases to spread further.
When either of these results has become apparent, controversy on the subject flags, and gradually dies away.
From this time may usually be dated the decline in the living power of the doctrine.
We often hear the teachers of all creeds lamenting the difficulty of keeping up in the minds of believers a lively apprehension of the truth which they nominally recognise, so that it may penetrate the feelings, and acquire a real mastery over the conduct.
By Christianity I here mean what is accounted such by all churches and sects--the maxims and precepts contained in the New Testament.
These are considered sacred, and accepted as laws, by all professing Christians.
Yet it is scarcely too much to say that not one Christian in a thousand guides or tests his individual conduct by reference to those laws.
The standard to which he does refer it, is the custom of his nation, his class, or his religious profession.
To the first of these standards he gives his homage; to the other his real allegiance.
They are not insincere when they say that they believe these things.
They do believe them, as people believe what they have always heard lauded and never discussed.
But in the sense of that living belief which regulates conduct, they believe these doctrines just up to the point to which it is usual to act upon them.
The doctrines in their integrity are serviceable to pelt adversaries with; and it is understood that they are to be put forward (when possible) as the reasons for whatever people do that they think laudable.
But any one who reminded them that the maxims require an infinity of things which they never even think of doing, would gain nothing but to be classed among those very unpopular characters who affect to be better than other people.
The doctrines have no hold on ordinary believers--are not a power in their minds.
Whenever conduct is concerned, they look round for Mr.
A and B to direct them how far to go in obeying Christ.
Now we may be well assured that the case was not thus, but far otherwise, with the early Christians.
Had it been thus, Christianity never would have expanded from an obscure sect of the despised Hebrews into the religion of the Roman empire.
When their enemies said, "See how these Christians love one another" (a remark not likely to be made by anybody now), they assuredly had a much livelier feeling of the meaning of their creed than they have ever had since.
And to this cause, probably, it is chiefly owing that Christianity now makes so little progress in extending its domain, and after eighteen centuries, is still nearly confined to Europeans and the descendants of Europeans.
The sayings of Christ coexist passively in their minds, producing hardly any effect beyond what is caused by mere listening to words so amiable and bland.
Both teachers and learners go to sleep at their post, as soon as there is no enemy in the field.
The same thing holds true, generally speaking, of all traditional doctrines--those of prudence and knowledge of life, as well as of morals or religion.
The fatal tendency of mankind to leave off thinking about a thing when it is no longer doubtful, is the cause of half their errors.
A contemporary author has well spoken of "the deep slumber of a decided opinion."
But what! (it may be asked) Is the absence of unanimity an indispensable condition of true knowledge?
Is it necessary that some part of mankind should persist in error, to enable any to realise the truth?
Does a belief cease to be real and vital as soon as it is generally received--and is a proposition never thoroughly understood and felt unless some doubt of it remains?
As soon as mankind have unanimously accepted a truth, does the truth perish within them?
The highest aim and best result of improved intelligence, it has hitherto been thought, is to unite mankind more and more in the acknowledgment of all important truths: and does the intelligence only last as long as it has not achieved its object?
Do the fruits of conquest perish by the very completeness of the victory?
The cessation, on one question after another, of serious controversy, is one of the necessary incidents of the consolidation of opinion; a consolidation as salutary in the case of true opinions, as it is dangerous and noxious when the opinions are erroneous.
But though this gradual narrowing of the bounds of diversity of opinion is necessary in both senses of the term, being at once inevitable and indispensable, we are not therefore obliged to conclude that all its consequences must be beneficial.
But instead of seeking contrivances for this purpose, they have lost those they formerly had.
The Socratic dialectics, so magnificently exemplified in the dialogues of Plato, were a contrivance of this description.
The school disputations of the middle ages had a somewhat similar object.
They were intended to make sure that the pupil understood his own opinion, and (by necessary correlation) the opinion opposed to it, and could enforce the grounds of the one and confute those of the other.
It is the fashion of the present time to disparage negative logic--that which points out weaknesses in theory or errors in practice, without establishing positive truths.
That, therefore, which when absent, it is so indispensable, but so difficult, to create, how worse than absurd is it to forego, when spontaneously offering itself!
It still remains to speak of one of the principal causes which make diversity of opinion advantageous, and will continue to do so until mankind shall have entered a stage of intellectual advancement which at present seems at an incalculable distance.
Popular opinions, on subjects not palpable to sense, are often true, but seldom or never the whole truth.
They are a part of the truth; sometimes a greater, sometimes a smaller part, but exaggerated, distorted, and disjoined from the truths by which they ought to be accompanied and limited.
The latter case is hitherto the most frequent, as, in the human mind, one-sidedness has always been the rule, and many-sidedness the exception.
Hence, even in revolutions of opinion, one part of the truth usually sets while another rises.
No sober judge of human affairs will feel bound to be indignant because those who force on our notice truths which we should otherwise have overlooked, overlook some of those which we see.
Not that the current opinions were on the whole farther from the truth than Rousseau's were; on the contrary, they were nearer to it; they contained more of positive truth, and very much less of error.
Nevertheless there lay in Rousseau's doctrine, and has floated down the stream of opinion along with it, a considerable amount of exactly those truths which the popular opinion wanted; and these are the deposit which was left behind when the flood subsided.
Each of these modes of thinking derives its utility from the deficiencies of the other; but it is in a great measure the opposition of the other that keeps each within the limits of reason and sanity.
That is the opinion which, for the time being, represents the neglected interests, the side of human well-being which is in danger of obtaining less than its share.
I am aware that there is not, in this country, any intolerance of differences of opinion on most of these topics.
They are adduced to show, by admitted and multiplied examples, the universality of the fact, that only through diversity of opinion is there, in the existing state of human intellect, a chance of fair-play to all sides of the truth.
The Christian morality, for instance, is the whole truth on that subject, and if any one teaches a morality which varies from it, he is wholly in error." As this is of all cases the most important in practice, none can be fitter to test the general maxim.
But before pronouncing what Christian morality is or is not, it would be desirable to decide what is meant by Christian morality.
If it means the morality of the New Testament, I wonder that any one who derives his knowledge of this from the book itself, can suppose that it was announced, or intended, as a complete doctrine of morals.
To extract from it a body of ethical doctrine, has ever been possible without eking it out from the Old Testament, that is, from a system elaborate indeed, but in many respects barbarous, and intended only for a barbarous people.
For the most part, indeed, they have contented themselves with cutting off the additions which had been made to it in the middle ages, each sect supplying the place by fresh additions, adapted to its own character and tendencies.
Christian morality (so called) has all the characters of a reaction; it is, in great part, a protest against Paganism.
And while, in the morality of the best Pagan nations, duty to the State holds even a disproportionate place, infringing on the just liberty of the individual; in purely Christian ethics, that grand department of duty is scarcely noticed or acknowledged.
Far less would I insinuate this of the doctrines and precepts of Christ himself.
And this being so, I think it a great error to persist in attempting to find in the Christian doctrine that complete rule for our guidance, which its author intended it to sanction and enforce, but only partially to provide.
I believe, too, that this narrow theory is becoming a grave practical evil, detracting greatly from the value of the moral training and instruction, which so many well-meaning persons are now at length exerting themselves to promote.
It is not necessary that in ceasing to ignore the moral truths not contained in Christianity, men should ignore any of those which it does contain.
Such prejudice, or oversight, when it occurs, is altogether an evil; but it is one from which we cannot hope to be always exempt, and must be regarded as the price paid for an inestimable good.
If Christians would teach infidels to be just to Christianity, they should themselves be just to infidelity.
I do not pretend that the most unlimited use of the freedom of enunciating all possible opinions would put an end to the evils of religious or philosophical sectarianism.
Every truth which men of narrow capacity are in earnest about, is sure to be asserted, inculcated, and in many ways even acted on, as if no other truth existed in the world, or at all events none that could limit or qualify the first.
But it is not on the impassioned partisan, it is on the calmer and more disinterested bystander, that this collision of opinions works its salutary effect.
We have now recognised the necessity to the mental well-being of mankind (on which all their other well-being depends) of freedom of opinion, and freedom of the expression of opinion, on four distinct grounds; which we will now briefly recapitulate.
First, if any opinion is compelled to silence, that opinion may, for aught we can certainly know, be true.
To deny this is to assume our own infallibility.
Before quitting the subject of freedom of opinion, it is fit to take some notice of those who say, that the free expression of all opinions should be permitted, on condition that the manner be temperate, and do not pass the bounds of fair discussion.
But this, though an important consideration in a practical point of view, merges in a more fundamental objection.
Undoubtedly the manner of asserting an opinion, even though it be a true one, may be very objectionable, and may justly incur severe censure.
But the principal offences of the kind are such as it is mostly impossible, unless by accidental self-betrayal, to bring home to conviction.
The gravest of them is, to argue sophistically, to suppress facts or arguments, to misstate the elements of the case, or misrepresent the opposite opinion.
Yet whatever mischief arises from their use, is greatest when they are employed against the comparatively defenceless; and whatever unfair advantage can be derived by any opinion from this mode of asserting it, accrues almost exclusively to received opinions.
The worst offence of this kind which can be committed by a polemic, is to stigmatise those who hold the contrary opinion as bad and immoral men.
This is the real morality of public discussion; and if often violated, I am happy to think that there are many controversialists who to a great extent observe it, and a still greater number who conscientiously strive towards it.
For, in the first place, the prosecutions were not persisted in; and, in the second, they were never, properly speaking, political prosecutions.
The offence charged was not that of criticising institutions, or the acts or persons of rulers, but of circulating what was deemed an immoral doctrine, the lawfulness of Tyrannicide.
If the arguments of the present chapter are of any validity, there ought to exist the fullest liberty of professing and discussing, as a matter of ethical conviction, any doctrine, however immoral it may be considered.
It would, therefore, be irrelevant and out of place to examine here, whether the doctrine of Tyrannicide deserves that title.
As such, I hold that the instigation to it, in a specific case, may be a proper subject of punishment, but only if an overt act has followed, and at least a probable connection can be established between the act and the instigation.
Even then, it is not a foreign government, but the very government assailed, which alone, in the exercise of self-defence, can legitimately punish attacks directed against its own existence.
In December following, he received a free pardon from the Crown.
Toleration was the great corner-stone of the religious liberties of this country; but do not let them abuse that precious word toleration.
Who, after this imbecile display, can indulge the illusion that religious persecution has passed away, never to return?
This last proviso is of course indispensable.
No one pretends that actions should be as free as opinions.
On the contrary, even opinions lose their immunity, when the circumstances in which they are expressed are such as to constitute their expression a positive instigation to some mischievous act.
Acts, of whatever kind, which, without justifiable cause, do harm to others, may be, and in the more important cases absolutely require to be, controlled by the unfavourable sentiments, and, when needful, by the active interference of mankind.
The liberty of the individual must be thus far limited; he must not make himself a nuisance to other people.
It is desirable, in short, that in things which do not primarily concern others, individuality should assert itself.
Where, not the person's own character, but the traditions or customs of other people are the rule of conduct, there is wanting one of the principal ingredients of human happiness, and quite the chief ingredient of individual and social progress.
In maintaining this principle, the greatest difficulty to be encountered does not lie in the appreciation of means towards an acknowledged end, but in the indifference of persons in general to the end itself.
But the evil is, that individual spontaneity is hardly recognised by the common modes of thinking, as having any intrinsic worth, or deserving any regard on its own account.
Little, however, as people are accustomed to a doctrine like that of Von Humboldt, and surprising as it may be to them to find so high a value attached to individuality, the question, one must nevertheless think, can only be one of degree.
No one's idea of excellence in conduct is that people should do absolutely nothing but copy one another.
No one would assert that people ought not to put into their mode of life, and into the conduct of their concerns, any impress whatever of their own judgment, or of their own individual character.
Nobody denies that people should be so taught and trained in youth, as to know and benefit by the ascertained results of human experience.
But it is the privilege and proper condition of a human being, arrived at the maturity of his faculties, to use and interpret experience in his own way.
It is for him to find out what part of recorded experience is properly applicable to his own circumstances and character.
Secondly, their interpretation of experience may be correct, but unsuitable to him.
Customs are made for customary circumstances, and customary characters: and his circumstances or his character may be uncustomary.
The human faculties of perception, judgment, discriminative feeling, mental activity, and even moral preference, are exercised only in making a choice.
He who does anything because it is the custom, makes no choice.
He gains no practice either in discerning or in desiring what is best.
The mental and moral, like the muscular powers, are improved only by being used.
The faculties are called into no exercise by doing a thing merely because others do it, no more than by believing a thing only because others believe it.
He who lets the world, or his own portion of it, choose his plan of life for him, has no need of any other faculty than the ape-like one of imitation.
He who chooses his plan for himself, employs all his faculties.
He must use observation to see, reasoning and judgment to foresee, activity to gather materials for decision, discrimination to decide, and when he has decided, firmness and self-control to hold to his deliberate decision.
And these qualities he requires and exercises exactly in proportion as the part of his conduct which he determines according to his own judgment and feelings is a large one.
It is possible that he might be guided in some good path, and kept out of harm's way, without any of these things.
But what will be his comparative worth as a human being?
It really is of importance, not only what men do, but also what manner of men they are that do it.
Among the works of man, which human life is rightly employed in perfecting and beautifying, the first in importance surely is man himself.
Human nature is not a machine to be built after a model, and set to do exactly the work prescribed for it, but a tree, which requires to grow and develop itself on all sides, according to the tendency of the inward forces which make it a living thing.
It will probably be conceded that it is desirable people should exercise their understandings, and that an intelligent following of custom, or even occasionally an intelligent deviation from custom, is better than a blind and simply mechanical adhesion to it.
It is not because men's desires are strong that they act ill; it is because their consciences are weak.
There is no natural connection between strong impulses and a weak conscience.
The natural connection is the other way.
To say that one person's desires and feelings are stronger and more various than those of another, is merely to say that he has more of the raw material of human nature, and is therefore capable, perhaps of more evil, but certainly of more good.
Strong impulses are but another name for energy.
Energy may be turned to bad uses; but more good may always be made of an energetic nature, than of an indolent and impassive one.
Those who have most natural feeling, are always those whose cultivated feelings may be made the strongest.
The same strong susceptibilities which make the personal impulses vivid and powerful, are also the source from whence are generated the most passionate love of virtue, and the sternest self-control.
It is through the cultivation of these, that society both does its duty and protects its interests: not by rejecting the stuff of which heroes are made, because it knows not how to make them.
A person whose desires and impulses are his own--are the expression of his own nature, as it has been developed and modified by his own culture--is said to have a character.
One whose desires and impulses are not his own, has no character, no more than a steam-engine has a character.
If, in addition to being his own, his impulses are strong, and are under the government of a strong will, he has an energetic character.
In some early states of society, these forces might be, and were, too much ahead of the power which society then possessed of disciplining and controlling them.
There has been a time when the element of spontaneity and individuality was in excess, and the social principle had a hard struggle with it.
The difficulty then was, to induce men of strong bodies or minds to pay obedience to any rules which required them to control their impulses.
But society has now fairly got the better of individuality; and the danger which threatens human nature is not the excess, but the deficiency, of personal impulses and preferences.
In our times, from the highest class of society down to the lowest, every one lives as under the eye of a hostile and dreaded censorship.
They ask themselves, what is suitable to my position? what is usually done by persons of my station and pecuniary circumstances? or (worse still) what is usually done by persons of a station and circumstances superior to mine?
I do not mean that they choose what is customary, in preference to what suits their own inclination.
It does not occur to them to have any inclination, except for what is customary.
Now is this, or is it not, the desirable condition of human nature?
According to that, the one great offence of man is Self-will.
All the good of which humanity is capable, is comprised in Obedience.
You have no choice; thus you must do, and no otherwise: "whatever is not a duty, is a sin." Human nature being radically corrupt, there is no redemption for any one until human nature is killed within him.
In some such insidious form there is at present a strong tendency to this narrow theory of life, and to the pinched and hidebound type of human character which it patronises.
It may be better to be a John Knox than an Alcibiades, but it is better to be a Pericles than either; nor would a Pericles, if we had one in these days, be without anything good which belonged to John Knox.
In proportion to the development of his individuality, each person becomes more valuable to himself, and is therefore capable of being more valuable to others.
There is a greater fulness of life about his own existence, and when there is more life in the units there is more in the mass which is composed of them.
As much compression as is necessary to prevent the stronger specimens of human nature from encroaching on the rights of others, cannot be dispensed with; but for this there is ample compensation even in the point of view of human development.
The means of development which the individual loses by being prevented from gratifying his inclinations to the injury of others, are chiefly obtained at the expense of the development of other people.
And even to himself there is a full equivalent in the better development of the social part of his nature, rendered possible by the restraint put upon the selfish part.
To be held to rigid rules of justice for the sake of others, develops the feelings and capacities which have the good of others for their object.
But to be restrained in things not affecting their good, by their mere displeasure, develops nothing valuable, except such force of character as may unfold itself in resisting the restraint.
If acquiesced in, it dulls and blunts the whole nature.
To give any fair-play to the nature of each, it is essential that different persons should be allowed to lead different lives.
In proportion as this latitude has been exercised in any age, has that age been noteworthy to posterity.
Even despotism does not produce its worst effects, so long as Individuality exists under it; and whatever crushes individuality is despotism, by whatever name it may be called, and whether it professes to be enforcing the will of God or the injunctions of men.
In the first place, then, I would suggest that they might possibly learn something from them.
It will not be denied by anybody, that originality is a valuable element in human affairs.
There is always need of persons not only to discover new truths, and point out when what were once truths are true no longer, but also to commence new practices, and set the example of more enlightened conduct, and better taste and sense in human life.
This cannot well be gainsaid by anybody who does not believe that the world has already attained perfection in all its ways and practices.
It is true that this benefit is not capable of being rendered by everybody alike: there are but few persons, in comparison with the whole of mankind, whose experiments, if adopted by others, would be likely to be any improvement on established practice.
But these few are the salt of the earth; without them, human life would become a stagnant pool.
Not only is it they who introduce good things which did not before exist; it is they who keep the life in those which already existed.
If there were nothing new to be done, would human intellect cease to be necessary?
Would it be a reason why those who do the old things should forget why they are done, and do them like cattle, not like human beings?
Persons of genius, it is true, are, and are always likely to be, a small minority; but in order to have them, it is necessary to preserve the soil in which they grow.
If from timidity they consent to be forced into one of these moulds, and to let all that part of themselves which cannot expand under the pressure remain unexpanded, society will be little the better for their genius.
People think genius a fine thing if it enables a man to write an exciting poem, or paint a picture.
But in its true sense, that of originality in thought and action, though no one says that it is not a thing to be admired, nearly all, at heart, think that they can do very well without it.
Unhappily this is too natural to be wondered at.
Originality is the one thing which unoriginal minds cannot feel the use of.
They cannot see what it is to do for them: how should they?
If they could see what it would do for them, it would not be originality.
The first service which originality has to render them, is that of opening their eyes: which being once fully done, they would have a chance of being themselves original.
In sober truth, whatever homage may be professed, or even paid, to real or supposed mental superiority, the general tendency of things throughout the world is to render mediocrity the ascendant power among mankind.
At present individuals are lost in the crowd.
In politics it is almost a triviality to say that public opinion now rules the world.
The only power deserving the name is that of masses, and of governments while they make themselves the organ of the tendencies and instincts of masses.
This is as true in the moral and social relations of private life as in public transactions.
Those whose opinions go by the name of public opinion, are not always the same sort of public: in America they are the whole white population; in England, chiefly the middle class.
But they are always a mass, that is to say, collective mediocrity.
And what is a still greater novelty, the mass do not now take their opinions from dignitaries in Church or State, from ostensible leaders, or from books.
Their thinking is done for them by men much like themselves, addressing them or speaking in their name, on the spur of the moment, through the newspapers.
I do not assert that anything better is compatible, as a general rule, with the present low state of the human mind.
But that does not hinder the government of mediocrity from being mediocre government.
The initiation of all wise or noble things, comes and must come from individuals; generally at first from some one individual.
The honour and glory of the average man is that he is capable of following that initiative; that he can respond internally to wise and noble things, and be led to them with his eyes open.
I am not countenancing the sort of "hero-worship" which applauds the strong man of genius for forcibly seizing on the government of the world and making it do his bidding in spite of itself.
All he can claim is, freedom to point out the way.
The power of compelling others into it, is not only inconsistent with the freedom and development of all the rest, but corrupting to the strong man himself.
It is in these circumstances most especially, that exceptional individuals, instead of being deterred, should be encouraged in acting differently from the mass.
In other times there was no advantage in their doing so, unless they acted not only differently, but better.
In this age the mere example of nonconformity, the mere refusal to bend the knee to custom, is itself a service.
Precisely because the tyranny of opinion is such as to make eccentricity a reproach, it is desirable, in order to break through that tyranny, that people should be eccentric.
Eccentricity has always abounded when and where strength of character has abounded; and the amount of eccentricity in a society has generally been proportional to the amount of genius, mental vigour, and moral courage which it contained.
That so few now dare to be eccentric, marks the chief danger of the time.
I have said that it is important to give the freest scope possible to uncustomary things, in order that it may in time appear which of these are fit to be converted into customs.
There is no reason that all human existences should be constructed on some one, or some small number of patterns.
If a person possesses any tolerable amount of common-sense and experience, his own mode of laying out his existence is the best, not because it is the best in itself, but because it is his own mode.
Human beings are not like sheep; and even sheep are not undistinguishably alike.
If it were only that people have diversities of taste, that is reason enough for not attempting to shape them all after one model.
But different persons also require different conditions for their spiritual development; and can no more exist healthily in the same moral, than all the variety of plants can in the same physical, atmosphere and climate.
The same things which are helps to one person towards the cultivation of his higher nature, are hindrances to another.
The same mode of life is a healthy excitement to one, keeping all his faculties of action and enjoyment in their best order, while to another it is a distracting burthen, which suspends or crushes all internal life.
Why then should tolerance, as far as the public sentiment is concerned, extend only to tastes and modes of life which extort acquiescence by the multitude of their adherents?
But the man, and still more the woman, who can be accused either of doing "what nobody does," or of not doing "what everybody does," is the subject of as much depreciatory remark as if he or she had committed some grave moral delinquency.
Persons require to possess a title, or some other badge of rank, or of the consideration of people of rank, to be able to indulge somewhat in the luxury of doing as they like without detriment to their estimation.
There is one characteristic of the present direction of public opinion, peculiarly calculated to make it intolerant of any marked demonstration of individuality.
Now, in addition to this fact which is general, we have only to suppose that a strong movement has set in towards the improvement of morals, and it is evident what we have to expect.
These tendencies of the times cause the public to be more disposed than at most former periods to prescribe general rules of conduct, and endeavour to make every one conform to the approved standard.
And that standard, express or tacit, is to desire nothing strongly.
Its ideal of character is to be without any marked character; to maim by compression, like a Chinese lady's foot, every part of human nature which stands out prominently, and tends to make the person markedly dissimilar in outline to commonplace humanity.
As is usually the case with ideals which exclude one-half of what is desirable, the present standard of approbation produces only an inferior imitation of the other half.
Already energetic characters on any large scale are becoming merely traditional.
There is now scarcely any outlet for energy in this country except business.
The energy expended in that may still be regarded as considerable.
What little is left from that employment, is expended on some hobby; which may be a useful, even a philanthropic hobby, but is always some one thing, and generally a thing of small dimensions.
The greatness of England is now all collective: individually small, we only appear capable of anything great by our habit of combining; and with this our moral and religious philanthropists are perfectly contented.
But it was men of another stamp than this that made England what it has been; and men of another stamp will be needed to prevent its decline.
The greater part of the world has, properly speaking, no history, because the despotism of Custom is complete.
Custom is there, in all things, the final appeal; justice and right mean conformity to custom; the argument of custom no one, unless some tyrant intoxicated with power, thinks of resisting.
Those nations must once have had originality; they did not start out of the ground populous, lettered, and versed in many of the arts of life; they made themselves all this, and were then the greatest and most powerful nations in the world.
The subjects or dependants of tribes whose forefathers wandered in the forests when theirs had magnificent palaces and gorgeous temples, but over whom custom exercised only a divided rule with liberty and progress.
A people, it appears, may be progressive for a certain length of time, and then stop: when does it stop?
When it ceases to possess individuality.
If a similar change should befall the nations of Europe, it will not be in exactly the same shape: the despotism of custom with which these nations are threatened is not precisely stationariness.
It proscribes singularity, but it does not preclude change, provided all change together.
We have discarded the fixed costumes of our forefathers; every one must still dress like other people, but the fashion may change once or twice a year.
It is not progress that we object to; on the contrary, we flatter ourselves that we are the most progressive people who ever lived.
Surely the people who did this have discovered the secret of human progressiveness, and must have kept themselves steadily at the head of the movement of the world.
On the contrary, they have become stationary--have remained so for thousands of years; and if they are ever to be farther improved, it must be by foreigners.
They have succeeded beyond all hope in what English philanthropists are so industriously working at--in making a people all alike, all governing their thoughts and conduct by the same maxims and rules; and these are the fruits.
What is it that has hitherto preserved Europe from this lot?
What has made the European family of nations an improving, instead of a stationary portion of mankind?
Not any superior excellence in them, which, when it exists, exists as the effect, not as the cause; but their remarkable diversity of character and culture.
Europe is, in my judgment, wholly indebted to this plurality of paths for its progressive and many-sided development.
But it already begins to possess this benefit in a considerably less degree.
It is decidedly advancing towards the Chinese ideal of making all people alike.
M. de Tocqueville, in his last important work, remarks how much more the Frenchmen of the present day resemble one another, than did those even of the last generation.
The same remark might be made of Englishmen in a far greater degree.
In a passage already quoted from Wilhelm von Humboldt, he points out two things as necessary conditions of human development, because necessary to render people unlike one another; namely, freedom, and variety of situations.
The second of these two conditions is in this country every day diminishing.
The circumstances which surround different classes and individuals, and shape their characters, are daily becoming more assimilated.
Formerly, different ranks, different neighbourhoods, different trades and professions, lived in what might be called different worlds; at present, to a great degree in the same.
Comparatively speaking, they now read the same things, listen to the same things, see the same things, go to the same places, have their hopes and fears directed to the same objects, have the same rights and liberties, and the same means of asserting them.
Great as are the differences of position which remain, they are nothing to those which have ceased.
And the assimilation is still proceeding.
All the political changes of the age promote it, since they all tend to raise the low and to lower the high.
Every extension of education promotes it, because education brings people under common influences, and gives them access to the general stock of facts and sentiments.
Improvements in the means of communication promote it, by bringing the inhabitants of distant places into personal contact, and keeping up a rapid flow of changes of residence between one place and another.
A more powerful agency than even all these, in bringing about a general similarity among mankind, is the complete establishment, in this and other free countries, of the ascendency of public opinion in the State.
The combination of all these causes forms so great a mass of influences hostile to Individuality, that it is not easy to see how it can stand its ground.
If the claims of Individuality are ever to be asserted, the time is now, while much is still wanting to complete the enforced assimilation.
It is only in the earlier stages that any stand can be successfully made against the encroachment.
The demand that all other people shall resemble ourselves, grows by what it feeds on.
Mankind speedily become unable to conceive diversity, when they have been for some time unaccustomed to see it.
These trials speak volumes as to the state of feeling and opinion among the vulgar with regard to human liberty.
What, then, is the rightful limit to the sovereignty of the individual over himself?
Where does the authority of society begin?
How much of human life should be assigned to individuality, and how much to society?
Each will receive its proper share, if each has that which more particularly concerns it.
To individuality should belong the part of life in which it is chiefly the individual that is interested; to society, the part which chiefly interests society.
These conditions society is justified in enforcing, at all costs to those who endeavour to withhold fulfilment.
The acts of an individual may be hurtful to others, or wanting in due consideration for their welfare, without going the length of violating any of their constituted rights.
The offender may then be justly punished by opinion though not by law.
As soon as any part of a person's conduct affects prejudicially the interests of others, society has jurisdiction over it, and the question whether the general welfare will or will not be promoted by interfering with it, becomes open to discussion.
In all such cases there should be perfect freedom, legal and social, to do the action and stand the consequences.
Instead of any diminution, there is need of a great increase of disinterested exertion to promote the good of others.
But disinterested benevolence can find other instruments to persuade people to their good, than whips and scourges, either of the literal or the metaphorical sort.
I am the last person to undervalue the self-regarding virtues; they are only second in importance, if even second, to the social.
It is equally the business of education to cultivate both.
But even education works by conviction and persuasion as well as by compulsion, and it is by the former only that, when the period of education is past, the self-regarding virtues should be inculcated.
Human beings owe to each other help to distinguish the better from the worse, and encouragement to choose the former and avoid the latter.
They should be for ever stimulating each other to increased exercise of their higher faculties, and increased direction of their feelings and aims towards wise instead of foolish, elevating instead of degrading, objects and contemplations.
But neither one person, nor any number of persons, is warranted in saying to another human creature of ripe years, that he shall not do with his life for his own benefit what he chooses to do with it.
In this department, therefore, of human affairs, Individuality has its proper field of action.
Considerations to aid his judgment, exhortations to strengthen his will, may be offered to him, even obtruded on him, by others; but he himself is the final judge.
All errors which he is likely to commit against advice and warning, are far outweighed by the evil of allowing others to constrain him to what they deem his good.
I do not mean that the feelings with which a person is regarded by others, ought not to be in any way affected by his self-regarding qualities or deficiencies.
If he is eminent in any of the qualities which conduce to his own good, he is, so far, a proper object of admiration.
He is so much the nearer to the ideal perfection of human nature.
If he is grossly deficient in those qualities, a sentiment the opposite of admiration will follow.
We have a right, also, in various ways, to act upon our unfavourable opinion of any one, not to the oppression of his individuality, but in the exercise of ours.
We are not bound, for example, to seek his society; we have a right to avoid it (though not to parade the avoidance), for we have a right to choose the society most acceptable to us.
We have a right, and it may be our duty, to caution others against him, if we think his example or conversation likely to have a pernicious effect on those with whom he associates.
We may give others a preference over him in optional good offices, except those which tend to his improvement.
Acts injurious to others require a totally different treatment.
And not only these acts, but the dispositions which lead to them, are properly immoral, and fit subjects of disapprobation which may rise to abhorrence.
They may be proofs of any amount of folly, or want of personal dignity and self-respect; but they are only a subject of moral reprobation when they involve a breach of duty to others, for whose sake the individual is bound to have care for himself.
What are called duties to ourselves are not socially obligatory, unless circumstances render them at the same time duties to others.
The distinction between the loss of consideration which a person may rightly incur by defect of prudence or of personal dignity, and the reprobation which is due to him for an offence against the rights of others, is not a merely nominal distinction.
It makes a vast difference both in our feelings and in our conduct towards him, whether he displeases us in things in which we think we have a right to control him, or in things in which we know that we have not.
If he displeases us, we may express our distaste, and we may stand aloof from a person as well as from a thing that displeases us; but we shall not therefore feel called on to make his life uncomfortable.
It is far otherwise if he has infringed the rules necessary for the protection of his fellow-creatures, individually or collectively.
The distinction here pointed out between the part of a person's life which concerns only himself, and that which concerns others, many persons will refuse to admit.
How (it may be asked) can any part of the conduct of a member of society be a matter of indifference to the other members?
No person is an entirely isolated being; it is impossible for a person to do anything seriously or permanently hurtful to himself, without mischief reaching at least to his near connections, and often far beyond them.
If he injures his property, he does harm to those who directly or indirectly derived support from it, and usually diminishes, by a greater or less amount, the general resources of the community.
And even (it will be added) if the consequences of misconduct could be confined to the vicious or thoughtless individual, ought society to abandon to their own guidance those who are manifestly unfit for it?
If protection against themselves is confessedly due to children and persons under age, is not society equally bound to afford it to persons of mature years who are equally incapable of self-government?
And as a supplement to the unavoidable imperfections of law, ought not opinion at least to organise a powerful police against these vices, and visit rigidly with social penalties those who are known to practise them?
There is no question here (it may be said) about restricting individuality, or impeding the trial of new and original experiments in living.
The only things it is sought to prevent are things which have been tried and condemned from the beginning of the world until now; things which experience has shown not to be useful or suitable to any person's individuality.
I fully admit that the mischief which a person does to himself, may seriously affect, both through their sympathies and their interests, those nearly connected with him, and in a minor degree, society at large.
When, by conduct of this sort, a person is led to violate a distinct and assignable obligation to any other person or persons, the case is taken out of the self-regarding class, and becomes amenable to moral disapprobation in the proper sense of the term.
If the resources which ought to have been devoted to them, had been diverted from them for the most prudent investment, the moral culpability would have been the same.
George Barnwell murdered his uncle to get money for his mistress, but if he had done it to set himself up in business, he would equally have been hanged.
In like manner, when a person disables himself, by conduct purely self-regarding, from the performance of some definite duty incumbent on him to the public, he is guilty of a social offence.
No person ought to be punished simply for being drunk; but a soldier or a policeman should be punished for being drunk on duty.
Whenever, in short, there is a definite damage, or a definite risk of damage, either to an individual or to the public, the case is taken out of the province of liberty, and placed in that of morality or law.
But I cannot consent to argue the point as if society had no means of bringing its weaker members up to its ordinary standard of rational conduct, except waiting till they do something irrational, and then punishing them, legally or morally, for it.
Society has had absolute power over them during all the early portion of their existence: it has had the whole period of childhood and nonage in which to try whether it could make them capable of rational conduct in life.
If society lets any considerable number of its members grow up mere children, incapable of being acted on by rational consideration of distant motives, society has itself to blame for the consequences.
Nor is there anything which tends more to discredit and frustrate the better means of influencing conduct, than a resort to the worse.
If there be among those whom it is attempted to coerce into prudence or temperance, any of the material of which vigorous and independent characters are made, they will infallibly rebel against the yoke.
But the strongest of all the arguments against the interference of the public with purely personal conduct, is that when it does interfere, the odds are that it interferes wrongly, and in the wrong place.
But there is no parity between the feeling of a person for his own opinion, and the feeling of another who is offended at his holding it; no more than between the desire of a thief to take a purse, and the desire of the right owner to keep it.
And a person's taste is as much his own peculiar concern as his opinion or his purse.
It is easy for any one to imagine an ideal public, which leaves the freedom and choice of individuals in all uncertain matters undisturbed, and only requires them to abstain from modes of conduct which universal experience has condemned.
But where has there been seen a public which set any such limit to its censorship? or when does the public trouble itself about universal experience?
These teach that things are right because they are right; because we feel them to be so.
They tell us to search in our own minds and hearts for laws of conduct binding on ourselves and on all others.
What can the poor public do but apply these instructions, and make their own personal feelings of good and evil, if they are tolerably unanimous in them, obligatory on all the world?
The evil here pointed out is not one which exists only in theory; and it may perhaps be expected that I should specify the instances in which the public of this age and country improperly invests its own preferences with the character of moral laws.
I am not writing an essay on the aberrations of existing moral feeling.
That is too weighty a subject to be discussed parenthetically, and by way of illustration.
Yet examples are necessary, to show that the principle I maintain is of serious and practical moment, and that I am not endeavouring to erect a barrier against imaginary evils.
And it is not difficult to show, by abundant instances, that to extend the bounds of what may be called moral police, until it encroaches on the most unquestionably legitimate liberty of the individual, is one of the most universal of all human propensities.
As a first instance, consider the antipathies which men cherish on no better grounds than that persons whose religious opinions are different from theirs, do not practise their religious observances, especially their religious abstinences.
To cite a rather trivial example, nothing in the creed or practice of Christians does more to envenom the hatred of Mahomedans against them, than the fact of their eating pork.
There are few acts which Christians and Europeans regard with more unaffected disgust, than Mussulmans regard this particular mode of satisfying hunger.
Suppose now that in a people, of whom the majority were Mussulmans, that majority should insist upon not permitting pork to be eaten within the limits of the country.
The practice is really revolting to such a public.
They also sincerely think that it is forbidden and abhorred by the Deity.
Neither could the prohibition be censured as religious persecution.
It might be religious in its origin, but it would not be persecution for religion, since nobody's religion makes it a duty to eat pork.
The only tenable ground of condemnation would be, that with the personal tastes and self-regarding concerns of individuals the public has no business to interfere.
To come somewhat nearer home: the majority of Spaniards consider it a gross impiety, offensive in the highest degree to the Supreme Being, to worship him in any other manner than the Roman Catholic; and no other public worship is lawful on Spanish soil.
The people of all Southern Europe look upon a married clergy as not only irreligious, but unchaste, indecent, gross, disgusting.
What do Protestants think of these perfectly sincere feelings, and of the attempt to enforce them against non-Catholics?
The next example, however, shall be taken from an interference with liberty which we have by no means passed all danger of.
How will the remaining portion of the community like to have the amusements that shall be permitted to them regulated by the religious and moral sentiments of the stricter Calvinists and Methodists?
Would they not, with considerable peremptoriness, desire these intrusively pious members of society to mind their own business?
This is precisely what should be said to every government and every public, who have the pretension that no person shall enjoy any pleasure which they think wrong.
To imagine another contingency, perhaps more likely to be realised than the one last mentioned.
There is confessedly a strong tendency in the modern world towards a democratic constitution of society, accompanied or not by popular political institutions.
We have only further to suppose a considerable diffusion of Socialist opinions, and it may become infamous in the eyes of the majority to possess more property than some very small amount, or any income not earned by manual labour.
Opinions similar in principle to these, already prevail widely among the artisan class, and weigh oppressively on those who are amenable to the opinion chiefly of that class, namely, its own members.
And they employ a moral police, which occasionally becomes a physical one, to deter skilful workmen from receiving, and employers from giving, a larger remuneration for a more useful service.
Lord Stanley's share in this correspondence is calculated to strengthen the hopes already built on him, by those who know how rare such qualities as are manifested in some of his public appearances, unhappily are among those who figure in political life.
Selling fermented liquors, however, is trading, and trading is a social act.
But the infringement complained of is not on the liberty of the seller, but on that of the buyer and consumer; since the State might just as well forbid him to drink wine, as purposely make it impossible for him to obtain it.
It destroys my primary right of security, by constantly creating and stimulating social disorder.
It invades my right of equality, by deriving a profit from the creation of a misery, I am taxed to support.
The doctrine ascribes to all mankind a vested interest in each other's moral, intellectual, and even physical perfection, to be defined by each claimant according to his own standard.
Another important example of illegitimate interference with the rightful liberty of the individual, not simply threatened, but long since carried into triumphant effect, is Sabbatarian legislation.
Without doubt, abstinence on one day in the week, so far as the exigencies of life permit, from the usual daily occupation, though in no respect religiously binding on any except Jews, is a highly beneficial custom.
It is true that the amusement of some is the day's work of others; but the pleasure, not to say the useful recreation, of many, is worth the labour of a few, provided the occupation is freely chosen, and can be freely resigned.
If a further remedy is sought, it might be found in the establishment by custom of a holiday on some other day of the week for those particular classes of persons.
The notion that it is one man's duty that another should be religious, was the foundation of all the religious persecutions ever perpetrated, and if admitted, would fully justify them.
It is a determination not to tolerate others in doing what is permitted by their religion, because it is not permitted by the persecutor's religion.
It is a belief that God not only abominates the act of the misbeliever, but will not hold us guiltless if we leave him unmolested.
Other countries are not asked to recognise such unions, or release any portion of their inhabitants from their own laws on the score of Mormonite opinions.
It also appears so to me, but I am not aware that any community has a right to force another to be civilised.
Let them send missionaries, if they please, to preach against it; and let them, by any fair means (of which silencing the teachers is not one), oppose the progress of similar doctrines among their own people.
If civilisation has got the better of barbarism when barbarism had the world to itself, it is too much to profess to be afraid lest barbarism, after having been fairly got under, should revive and conquer civilisation.
A civilisation that can thus succumb to its vanquished enemy, must first have become so degenerate, that neither its appointed priests and teachers, nor anybody else, has the capacity, or will take the trouble, to stand up for it.
If this be so, the sooner such a civilisation receives notice to quit, the better.
It can only go on from bad to worse, until destroyed and regenerated (like the Western Empire) by energetic barbarians.
When those regions afterwards fell under the dominion of Mahomedan conquerors, the Parsees obtained from them a continuance of indulgence, on condition of refraining from pork.
What was at first obedience to authority became a second nature, and the Parsees to this day abstain both from beef and pork.
Though not required by their religion, the double abstinence has had time to grow into a custom of their tribe; and custom, in the East, is a religion.
The principles asserted in these pages must be more generally admitted as the basis for discussion of details, before a consistent application of them to all the various departments of government and morals can be attempted with any prospect of advantage.
The few observations I propose to make on questions of detail, are designed to illustrate the principles, rather than to follow them out to their consequences.
The maxims are, first, that the individual is not accountable to society for his actions, in so far as these concern the interests of no person but himself.
Advice, instruction, persuasion, and avoidance by other people if thought necessary by them for their own good, are the only measures by which society can justifiably express its dislike or disapprobation of his conduct.
Secondly, that for such actions as are prejudicial to the interests of others, the individual is accountable and may be subjected either to social or to legal punishments, if society is of opinion that the one or the other is requisite for its protection.
In the first place, it must by no means be supposed, because damage, or probability of damage, to the interests of others, can alone justify the interference of society, that therefore it always does justify such interference.
In many cases, an individual, in pursuing a legitimate object, necessarily and therefore legitimately causes pain or loss to others, or intercepts a good which they had a reasonable hope of obtaining.
Such oppositions of interest between individuals often arise from bad social institutions, but are unavoidable while those institutions last; and some would be unavoidable under any institutions.
Whoever succeeds in an overcrowded profession, or in a competitive examination; whoever is preferred to another in any contest for an object which both desire, reaps benefit from the loss of others, from their wasted exertion and their disappointment.
But it is, by common admission, better for the general interest of mankind, that persons should pursue their objects undeterred by this sort of consequences.
This is the so-called doctrine of Free Trade, which rests on grounds different from, though equally solid with, the principle of individual liberty asserted in this Essay.
These interferences are objectionable, not as infringements on the liberty of the producer or seller, but on that of the buyer.
One of these examples, that of the sale of poisons, opens a new question; the proper limits of what may be called the functions of police; how far liberty may legitimately be invaded for the prevention of crime, or of accident.
It is one of the undisputed functions of government to take precautions against crime before it has been committed, as well as to detect and punish it afterwards.
Nevertheless, if a public authority, or even a private person, sees any one evidently preparing to commit a crime, they are not bound to look on inactive until the crime is committed, but may interfere to prevent it.
If poisons were never bought or used for any purpose except the commission of murder, it would be right to prohibit their manufacture and sale.
They may, however, be wanted not only for innocent but for useful purposes, and restrictions cannot be imposed in the one case without operating in the other.
Again, it is a proper office of public authority to guard against accidents.
Similar considerations, applied to such a question as the sale of poisons, may enable us to decide which among the possible modes of regulation are or are not contrary to principle.
Such a precaution, for example, as that of labelling the drug with some word expressive of its dangerous character, may be enforced without violation of liberty: the buyer cannot wish not to know that the thing he possesses has poisonous qualities.
But to require in all cases the certificate of a medical practitioner, would make it sometimes impossible, always expensive, to obtain the article for legitimate uses.
Precautions of a similar nature might be enforced in the sale of articles adapted to be instruments of crime.
The seller, for example, might be required to enter into a register the exact time of the transaction, the name and address of the buyer, the precise quality and quantity sold; to ask the purpose for which it was wanted, and record the answer he received.
When there was no medical prescription, the presence of some third person might be required, to bring home the fact to the purchaser, in case there should afterwards be reason to believe that the article had been applied to criminal purposes.
Such regulations would in general be no material impediment to obtaining the article, but a very considerable one to making an improper use of it without detection.
The right inherent in society, to ward off crimes against itself by antecedent precautions, suggests the obvious limitations to the maxim, that purely self-regarding misconduct cannot properly be meddled with in the way of prevention or punishment.
The making himself drunk, in a person whom drunkenness excites to do harm to others, is a crime against others.
There is another question to which an answer must be found, consistent with the principles which have been laid down.
This question is not free from difficulty.
The case of a person who solicits another to do an act, is not strictly a case of self-regarding conduct.
To give advice or offer inducements to any one, is a social act, and may therefore, like actions in general which affect others, be supposed amenable to social control.
But a little reflection corrects the first impression, by showing that if the case is not strictly within the definition of individual liberty, yet the reasons on which the principle of individual liberty is grounded, are applicable to it.
Whatever it is permitted to do, it must be permitted to advise to do.
The question is doubtful, only when the instigator derives a personal benefit from his advice; when he makes it his occupation, for subsistence or pecuniary gain, to promote what society and the state consider to be an evil.
Then, indeed, a new element of complication is introduced; namely, the existence of classes of persons with an interest opposed to what is considered as the public weal, and whose mode of living is grounded on the counteraction of it.
Ought this to be interfered with, or not?
Fornication, for example, must be tolerated, and so must gambling; but should a person be free to be a pimp, or to keep a gambling-house?
The case is one of those which lie on the exact boundary line between two principles, and it is not at once apparent to which of the two it properly belongs.
Still less ought the common operations of buying and selling to be interfered with on analogous grounds.
The interest, however, of these dealers in promoting intemperance is a real evil, and justifies the State in imposing restrictions and requiring guarantees, which but for that justification would be infringements of legitimate liberty.
On this as on most other practical questions, many distinctions require to be made.
To tax stimulants for the sole purpose of making them more difficult to be obtained, is a measure differing only in degree from their entire prohibition; and would be justifiable only if that were justifiable.
Every increase of cost is a prohibition, to those whose means do not come up to the augmented price; and to those who do, it is a penalty laid on them for gratifying a particular taste.
Their choice of pleasures, and their mode of expending their income, after satisfying their legal and moral obligations to the State and to individuals, are their own concern, and must rest with their own judgment.
These considerations may seem at first sight to condemn the selection of stimulants as special subjects of taxation for purposes of revenue.
Taxation, therefore, of stimulants, up to the point which produces the largest amount of revenue (supposing that the State needs all the revenue which it yields) is not only admissible, but to be approved of.
The question of making the sale of these commodities a more or less exclusive privilege, must be answered differently, according to the purposes to which the restriction is intended to be subservient.
All places of public resort require the restraint of a police, and places of this kind peculiarly, because offences against society are especially apt to originate there.
Any further restriction I do not conceive to be, in principle, justifiable.
The bare statement of the alternative shows the absurdity of supposing that such efforts have been made in any case which needs be considered here.
Yet in the laws, probably, of every country, this general rule has some exceptions.
Not only persons are not held to engagements which violate the rights of third parties, but it is sometimes considered a sufficient reason for releasing them from an engagement, that it is injurious to themselves.
In this and most other civilised countries, for example, an engagement by which a person should sell himself, or allow himself to be sold, as a slave, would be null and void; neither enforced by law nor by opinion.
The ground for thus limiting his power of voluntarily disposing of his own lot in life, is apparent, and is very clearly seen in this extreme case.
The reason for not interfering, unless for the sake of others, with a person's voluntary acts, is consideration for his liberty.
His voluntary choice is evidence that what he so chooses is desirable, or at the least endurable, to him, and his good is on the whole best provided for by allowing him to take his own means of pursuing it.
But by selling himself for a slave, he abdicates his liberty; he foregoes any future use of it, beyond that single act.
He therefore defeats, in his own case, the very purpose which is the justification of allowing him to dispose of himself.
He is no longer free; but is thenceforth in a position which has no longer the presumption in its favour, that would be afforded by his voluntarily remaining in it.
The principle of freedom cannot require that he should be free not to be free.
It is not freedom, to be allowed to alienate his freedom.
This subject is too important, and too complicated, to be discussed in a parenthesis, and I touch on it only so far as is necessary for purposes of illustration.
A person is bound to take all these circumstances into account, before resolving on a step which may affect such important interests of others; and if he does not allow proper weight to those interests, he is morally responsible for the wrong.
A person should be free to do as he likes in his own concerns; but he ought not to be free to do as he likes in acting for another, under the pretext that the affairs of another are his own affairs.
The State, while it respects the liberty of each in what specially regards himself, is bound to maintain a vigilant control over his exercise of any power which it allows him to possess over others.
This obligation is almost entirely disregarded in the case of the family relations, a case, in its direct influence on human happiness, more important than all others taken together.
It is in the case of children, that misapplied notions of liberty are a real obstacle to the fulfilment by the State of its duties.
Consider, for example, the case of education.
Is it not almost a self-evident axiom, that the State should require and compel the education, up to a certain standard, of every human being who is born its citizen?
Yet who is there that is not afraid to recognise and assert this truth?
But while this is unanimously declared to be the father's duty, scarcely anybody, in this country, will bear to hear of obliging him to perform it.
Instead of his being required to make any exertion or sacrifice for securing education to the child, it is left to his choice to accept it or not when it is provided gratis!
It might leave to parents to obtain the education where and how they pleased, and content itself with helping to pay the school fees of the poorer class of children, and defraying the entire school expenses of those who have no one else to pay for them.
The objections which are urged with reason against State education, do not apply to the enforcement of education by the State, but to the State's taking upon itself to direct that education; which is a totally different thing.
That the whole or any large part of the education of the people should be in State hands, I go as far as any one in deprecating.
All that has been said of the importance of individuality of character, and diversity in opinions and modes of conduct, involves, as of the same unspeakable importance, diversity of education.
An education established and controlled by the State, should only exist, if it exist at all, as one among many competing experiments, carried on for the purpose of example and stimulus, to keep the others up to a certain standard of excellence.
The instrument for enforcing the law could be no other than public examinations, extending to all children, and beginning at an early age.
An age might be fixed at which every child must be examined, to ascertain if he (or she) is able to read.
If a child proves unable, the father, unless he has some sufficient ground of excuse, might be subjected to a moderate fine, to be worked out, if necessary, by his labour, and the child might be put to school at his expense.
Once in every year the examination should be renewed, with a gradually extending range of subjects, so as to make the universal acquisition, and what is more, retention, of a certain minimum of general knowledge, virtually compulsory.
Beyond that minimum, there should be voluntary examinations on all subjects, at which all who come up to a certain standard of proficiency might claim a certificate.
The examinations on religion, politics, or other disputed topics, should not turn on the truth or falsehood of opinions, but on the matter of fact that such and such an opinion is held, on such grounds, by such authors, or schools, or churches.
There would be nothing to hinder them from being taught religion, if their parents chose, at the same schools where they were taught other things.
The examinations, however, in the higher branches of knowledge should, I conceive, be entirely voluntary.
The fact itself, of causing the existence of a human being, is one of the most responsible actions in the range of human life.
To undertake this responsibility--to bestow a life which may be either a curse or a blessing--unless the being on whom it is to be bestowed will have at least the ordinary chances of a desirable existence, is a crime against that being.
Such laws are interferences of the state to prohibit a mischievous act--an act injurious to others, which ought to be a subject of reprobation, and social stigma, even when it is not deemed expedient to superadd legal punishment.
When we compare the strange respect of mankind for liberty, with their strange want of respect for it, we might imagine that a man had an indispensable right to do harm to others, and no right at all to please himself without giving pain to any one.
I have reserved for the last place a large class of questions respecting the limits of government interference, which, though closely connected with the subject of this Essay, do not, in strictness, belong to it.
The objections to government interference, when it is not such as to involve infringement of liberty, may be of three kinds.
The first is, when the thing to be done is likely to be better done by individuals than by the government.
Speaking generally, there is no one so fit to conduct any business, or to determine how or by whom it shall be conducted, as those who are personally interested in it.
This principle condemns the interferences, once so common, of the legislature, or the officers of government, with the ordinary processes of industry.
But this part of the subject has been sufficiently enlarged upon by political economists, and is not particularly related to the principles of this Essay.
The second objection is more nearly allied to our subject.
This is a principal, though not the sole, recommendation of jury trial (in cases not political); of free and popular local and municipal institutions; of the conduct of industrial and philanthropic enterprises by voluntary associations.
These are not questions of liberty, and are connected with that subject only by remote tendencies; but they are questions of development.
Without these habits and powers, a free constitution can neither be worked nor preserved, as is exemplified by the too-often transitory nature of political freedom in countries where it does not rest upon a sufficient basis of local liberties.
Government operations tend to be everywhere alike.
With individuals and voluntary associations, on the contrary, there are varied experiments, and endless diversity of experience.
What the State can usefully do, is to make itself a central depository, and active circulator and diffuser, of the experience resulting from many trials.
Its business is to enable each experimentalist to benefit by the experiments of others, instead of tolerating no experiments but its own.
The third, and most cogent reason for restricting the interference of government, is the great evil of adding unnecessarily to its power.
And the evil would be greater, the more efficiently and scientifically the administrative machinery was constructed--the more skilful the arrangements for obtaining the best qualified hands and heads with which to work it.
One would not have been surprised if this argument had been used by the friends of the proposition, as an answer to its principal difficulty.
Coming from the opponents it is strange enough.
What is urged as an objection is the safety-valve of the proposed system.
To be admitted into the ranks of this bureaucracy, and when admitted, to rise therein, would be the sole objects of ambition.
Such is the melancholy condition of the Russian empire, as is shown in the accounts of those who have had sufficient opportunity of observation.
The Czar himself is powerless against the bureaucratic body; he can send any one of them to Siberia, but he cannot govern without them, or against their will.
On every decree of his they have a tacit veto, by merely refraining from carrying it into effect.
A very different spectacle is exhibited among a people accustomed to transact their own business.
This is what every free people ought to be: and a people capable of this is certain to be free; it will never let itself be enslaved by any man or body of men because these are able to seize and pull the reins of the central administration.
No bureaucracy can hope to make such a people as this do or undergo anything that they do not like.
But where everything is done through the bureaucracy, nothing to which the bureaucracy is really adverse can be done at all.
For the governors are as much the slaves of their organisation and discipline, as the governed are of the governors.
A Chinese mandarin is as much the tool and creature of a despotism as the humblest cultivator.
An individual Jesuit is to the utmost degree of abasement the slave of his order, though the order itself exists for the collective power and importance of its members.
It is not, also, to be forgotten, that the absorption of all the principal ability of the country into the governing body is fatal, sooner or later, to the mental activity and progressiveness of the body itself.
It is indispensable, therefore, that the means should exist, independently of the government, of forming such ability, and furnishing it with the opportunities and experience necessary for a correct judgment of great practical affairs.
It is, in a great measure, a question of detail, in which many and various considerations must be kept in view, and no absolute rule can be laid down.
This central organ should have a right to know all that is done, and its special duty should be that of making the knowledge acquired in one place available for others.
In all things not provided for by general rules, those officers should be left to their own judgment, under responsibility to their constituents.
Such, in its general conception, is the central superintendence which the Poor Law Board is intended to exercise over the administrators of the Poor Rate throughout the country.
But a central organ of information and instruction for all the localities, would be equally valuable in all departments of administration.
A government cannot have too much of the kind of activity which does not impede, but aids and stimulates, individual exertion and development.
Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark.
Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark.
If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with t
