This series of books will include in complete editions those masterpieces of English Literature that are best adapted for the use of schools and colleges.
Ample explanatory notes of such passages in the text as call for special attention will be supplied, but irrelevant annotation and explanations of the obvious will be rigidly excluded.
Ralph Waldo Emerson was born in Boston, May 25, 1803.
He was descended from a long line of New England ministers, men of refinement and education.
As a school-boy he was quiet and retiring, reading a great deal, but not paying much attention to his lessons.
He entered Harvard at the early age of fourteen, but never attained a high rank there, although he took a prize for an essay on Socrates, and was made class poet after several others had declined.
Next to his reserve and the faultless propriety of his conduct, his contemporaries at college seemed most impressed by the great maturity of his mind.
Emerson appears never to have been really a boy.
He was always serene and thoughtful, impressing all who knew him with that spirituality which was his most distinguishing characteristic.
After graduating from college he taught school for a time, and then entered the Harvard Divinity School under Dr.
Although he was not strong enough to attend all the lectures of the divinity course, the college authorities deemed the name Emerson sufficient passport to the ministry.
He was accordingly "approbated to preach" by the Middlesex Association of Ministers on October 10, 1826.
As a preacher, Emerson was interesting, though not particularly original.
His talent seems to have been in giving new meaning to the old truths of religion.
In his other pastoral duties Emerson was not quite so successful.
It is characteristic of his deep humanity and his dislike for all fuss and commonplace that he appeared to least advantage at a funeral.
A connoisseur in such matters, an old sexton, once remarked that on such occasions "he did not appear at ease at all.
To tell the truth, in my opinion, that young man was not born to be a minister."
In 1832 he preached a sermon in which he announced certain views in regard to the communion service which were disapproved by a large part of his congregation.
He found it impossible to continue preaching, and, with the most friendly feelings on both sides, he parted from his congregation.
A few months later (1833) he went to Europe for a short year of travel.
While abroad, he visited Walter Savage Landor, Coleridge and Wordsworth, and Thomas Carlyle.
This visit to Carlyle was to both men a most interesting experience.
They parted feeling that they had much intellectually in common.
This belief fostered a sympathy which, by the time they had discovered how different they really were, had grown so strong a habit that they always kept up their intimacy.
This year of travel opened Emerson's eyes to many things of which he had previously been ignorant; he had profited by detachment from the concerns of a limited community and an isolated church.
After his return he began to find his true field of activity in the lecture-hall, and delivered a number of addresses in Boston and its vicinity.
While thus coming before the open public on the lecture platform, he was all the time preparing the treatise which was to embody all the quintessential elements of his philosophical doctrine.
By its conception of external Nature as an incarnation of the Divine Mind it struck the fundamental principle of Emerson's religious belief.
The essay had a very small circulation at first, though later it became widely known.
In the winter of 1836 Emerson followed up his discourse on Nature by a course of twelve lectures on the "Philosophy of History," a considerable portion of which eventually became embodied in his essays.
This society, composed of the first twenty-five men in each class graduating from college, has annual meetings which have called forth the best efforts of many distinguished scholars and thinkers.
Emerson's address was listened to with the most profound interest.
It declared a sort of intellectual independence for America.
Henceforth we were to be emancipated from clogging foreign influences, and a national literature was to expand under the fostering care of the Republic.
In fact he had, as every great teacher has, only a limited number of principles and theories to teach.
These principles of life can all be enumerated in twenty words--self-reliance, culture, intellectual and moral independence, the divinity of nature and man, the necessity of labor, and high ideals.
Emerson spent the latter part of his life in lecturing and in literary work.
Edward Emerson, gave an interesting account of how these lectures were constructed. "All through his life he kept a journal.
This book, he said, was his 'Savings Bank.' The thoughts thus received and garnered in his journals were indexed, and a great many of them appeared in his published works.
Besides his essays and lectures Emerson left some poetry in which is embodied those thoughts which were to him too deep for prose expression.
Oliver Wendell Holmes in speaking of this says: "Emerson wrote occasionally in verse from his school-days until he had reached the age which used to be known as the grand climacteric, sixty-three....
His poems are not and hardly can become popular; they are not meant to be liked by the many, but to be dearly loved and cherished by the few....
His occasional lawlessness in technical construction, his somewhat fantastic expressions, his enigmatic obscurities hardly detract from the pleasant surprise his verses so often bring with them....
The poetic license which we allow in the verse of Emerson is more than excused by the noble spirit which makes us forget its occasional blemishes, sometimes to be pleased with them as characteristic of the writer."
Emerson was always a striking figure in the intellectual life of America.
His discourses were above all things inspiring.
Through them many were induced to strive for a higher self-culture.
His influence can be discerned in all the literary movements of the time.
He was the central figure of the so-called transcendental school which was so prominent fifty years ago, although he always rather held aloof from any enthusiastic participation in the movement.
Emerson lived a quiet life in Concord, Massachusetts. "He was a first-rate neighbor and one who always kept his fences up." He traveled extensively on his lecturing tours, even going as far as England.
Oliver Wendell Holmes has described him in this wise: "His personal appearance was that of the typical New Englander of college-bred ancestry.
His voice was very sweet, and penetrating without any loudness or mark of effort.
His enunciation was beautifully clear, but he often hesitated as if waiting for the right word to present itself.
His manner was very quiet, his smile was pleasant, but he did not like explosive laughter any better than Hawthorne did.
None who met him can fail to recall that serene and kindly presence, in which there was mingled a certain spiritual remoteness with the most benignant human welcome to all who were privileged to enjoy his companionship."
Emerson died April 27, 1882, after a few days' illness from pneumonia.
Garnett in his excellent biography says: "Seldom had 'the reaper whose name is Death' gathered such illustrious harvest as between December 1880 and April 1882.
And now Emerson lay down in death beside the painter of man and the searcher of nature, the English-Oriental statesman, the poet of the plain man and the poet of the artist, and the prophet whose name is indissolubly linked with his own.
All these men passed into eternity laden with the spoils of Time, but of none of them could it be said, as of Emerson, that the most shining intellectual glory and the most potent intellectual force of a continent had departed along with him."
Matthew Arnold, in an address on Emerson delivered in Boston, gave an excellent estimate of the rank we should accord to him in the great hierarchy of letters.
Some, perhaps, will think that Arnold was unappreciative and cold, but dispassionate readers will be inclined to agree with his judgment of our great American.
After a review of the poetical works of Emerson the English critic draws his conclusions as follows:
"I do not then place Emerson among the great poets.
But I go farther, and say that I do not place him among the great writers, the great men of letters.
They are men like Cicero, Plato, Bacon, Pascal, Swift, Voltaire--writers with, in the first place, a genius and instinct for style....
Brilliant and powerful passages in a man's writings do not prove his possession of it.
Emerson has passages of noble and pathetic eloquence; he has passages of shrewd and felicitous wit; he has crisp epigram; he has passages of exquisitely touched observation of nature.
Carlyle formulates perfectly the defects of his friend's poetic and literary productions when he says: 'For me it is too ethereal, speculative, theoretic; I will have all things condense themselves, take shape and body, if they are to have my sympathy.' ...
Not with the Miltons and Grays, not with the Platos and Spinozas, not with the Swifts and Voltaires, not with the Montaignes and Addisons, can we rank Emerson.
No man could see this clearer than Emerson himself. 'Alas, my friend,' he writes in reply to Carlyle, who had exhorted him to creative work,--'Alas, my friend, I can do no such gay thing as you say.
After all this unfavorable criticism Arnold begins to praise.
Quoting passages from the Essays, he adds:
And let no one object that it is too general; that more practical, positive direction is what we want....
Yes, truly, his insight is admirable; his truth is precious.
Yet the secret of his effect is not even in these; it is in his temper.
It is in the hopeful, serene, beautiful temper wherewith these, in Emerson, are indissolubly united; in which they work and have their being....
One can scarcely overrate the importance of holding fast to happiness and hope.
It gives to Emerson's work an invaluable virtue.
As Wordsworth's poetry is, in my judgment, the most important done in verse, in our language, during the present century, so Emerson's Essays are, I think, the most important work done in prose....
You cannot prize him too much, nor heed him too diligently."
Herman Grimm, a German critic of great influence in his own country, did much to obtain a hearing for Emerson's works in Germany.
At first the Germans could not understand the unusual English, the unaccustomed turns of phrase which are so characteristic of Emerson's style.
"Macaulay gives them no difficulty; even Carlyle is comprehended.
But in Emerson's writings the broad turnpike is suddenly changed into a hazardous sandy foot-path.
His thoughts and his style are American.
He is not writing for Berlin, but for the people of Massachusetts....
It is an art to rise above what we have been taught....
All great men are seen to possess this freedom.
They derive their standard from their own natures, and their observations on life are so natural and spontaneous that it would seem as if the most illiterate person with a scrap of common-sense would have made the same....
We become wiser with them, and know not how the difficult appears easy and the involved plain.
"Emerson possesses this noble manner of communicating himself.
He inspires me with courage and confidence.
He has read and seen but conceals the labor.
I meet in his works plenty of familiar facts, but he does not employ them to figure up anew the old worn-out problems: each stands on a new spot and serves for new combinations.
From everything he sees the direct line issuing which connects it with the focus of life....
Emerson's theory is that of the 'sovereignty of the individual.' To discover what a young man is good for, and to equip him for the path he is to strike out in life, regardless of any other consideration, is the great duty to which he calls attention.
He reveals to the eyes of the idealist the magnificent results of practical activity, and unfolds before the realist the grandeur of the ideal world of thought.
No man is to allow himself, through prejudice, to make a mistake in choosing the task to which he will devote his life.
Emerson's essays are, as it were, printed sermons--all having this same text....
The wealth and harmony of his language overpowered and entranced me anew.
But even now I cannot say wherein the secret of his influence lies.
What he has written is like life itself--the unbroken thread ever lengthened through the addition of the small events which make up each day's experience."
Froude in his famous "Life of Carlyle" gives an interesting description of Emerson's visit to the Carlyles in Scotland:
Emerson, the younger of the two, had just broken his Unitarian fetters, and was looking out around him like a young eagle longing for light.
He had read Carlyle's articles and had discerned with the instinct of genius that here was a voice speaking real and fiery convictions, and no longer echoes and conventionalisms.
He had come to Europe to study its social and spiritual phenomena; and to the young Emerson as to the old Goethe, the most important of them appeared to be Carlyle....
The acquaintance then begun to their mutual pleasure ripened into a deep friendship, which has remained unclouded in spite of wide divergences of opinion throughout their working lives."
"Our third happiness was the arrival of a certain young unknown friend named Emerson, from Boston, in the United States, who turned aside so far from his British, French, and Italian travels to see me here!
He had an introduction from Mill and a Frenchman (Baron d'Eichthal's nephew) whom John knew at Rome.
Of course, we could do no other than welcome him; the rather as he seemed to be one of the most lovable creatures in himself we had ever looked on.
He stayed till next day with us, and talked and heard to his heart's content, and left us all really sad to part with him."
In 1841 Carlyle wrote to John Sterling a few words apropos of the recent publication of Emerson's essays in England:
I consider it, in that sense, highly remarkable, rare, very rare, in these days of ours.
The few that read the book, I imagine, will get benefit of it.
To America, I sometimes say that Emerson, such as he is, seems to me like a kind of New Era."
John Morley, the acute English critic, has made an analytic study of Emerson's style, which may reconcile the reader to some of its exasperating peculiarities.
"One of the traits that every critic notes in Emerson's writing is that it is so abrupt, so sudden in its transitions, so discontinuous, so inconsecutive.
Everything is thrown in just as it comes, and sometimes the pell-mell is enough to persuade us that Pope did not exaggerate when he said that no one qualification is so likely to make a good writer as the power of rejecting his own thoughts....
Apart from his difficult staccato, Emerson is not free from secondary faults.
He uses words that are not only odd, but vicious in construction; he is sometimes oblique and he is often clumsy; and there is a visible feeling after epigrams that do not always come.
When people say that Emerson's style must be good and admirable because it fits his thought, they forget that though it is well that a robe should fit, there is still something to be said about its cut and fashion....
Yet, as happens to all fine minds, there came to Emerson ways of expression deeply marked with character.
On every page there is set the strong stamp of sincerity, and the attraction of a certain artlessness; the most awkward sentence rings true; and there is often a pure and simple note that touches us more than if it were the perfection of elaborated melody.
The uncouth procession of the periods discloses the travail of the thought, and that, too, is a kind of eloquence.
An honest reader easily forgives the rude jolt or unexpected start when it shows a thinker faithfully working his way along arduous and unworn tracks.
Even at the roughest, Emerson often interjects a delightful cadence.
As he says of Landor, his sentences are cubes which will stand firm, place them how or where you will.
In 'choice and pith of diction,' again, of which Mr.
Lowell speaks, he hits the mark with a felicity that is almost his own in this generation.
He is terse, concentrated, and free from the important blunder of mistaking intellectual dawdling for meditation.
Nor in fine does his abruptness ever impede a true urbanity.
The accent is homely and the apparel plain, but his bearing has a friendliness, a courtesy, a hospitable humanity, which goes nearer to our hearts than either literary decoration or rhetorical unction.
That modest and lenient fellow-feeling which gave such charm to his companionship breathes in his gravest writing, and prevents us from finding any page of it cold or hard or dry."
Whipple, the well-known American critic, wrote soon after Emerson's death:
"But 'sweetness and light' are precious and inspiring only so far as they express the essential sweetness of the disposition of the thinker, and the essential illuminating power of his intelligence.
Emerson's greatness came from his character.
To 'sweetness and light' he therefore added the prime quality of fearless manliness.
An imaginary genealogical chart of descent connecting him with Confucius or Gautama would be more satisfactory.
Indeed, the safest course to pursue is to quote his own words, and despairingly confess that it is the nature of genius 'to spring, like the rainbow daughter of Wonder, from the invisible, to abolish the past, and refuse all history.'"
Nature 1836 Essays (First Series) 1841 Essays (Second Series) 1844 Poems 1847 Miscellanies 1849 Representative Men 1850 English Traits 1856 Conduct of Life 1860 Society and Solitude 1870 Correspondence of Thomas Carlyle and R.W.
This address was delivered at Cambridge in 1837, before the Harvard Chapter of the Phi Beta Kappa Society, a college fraternity composed of the first twenty-five men in each graduating class.
The society has annual meetings, which have been the occasion for addresses from the most distinguished scholars and thinkers of the day.
I greet you on the recommencement of our literary year.
Our anniversary is one of hope, and, perhaps, not enough of labor.
Thus far, our holiday has been simply a friendly sign of the survival of the love of letters amongst a people too busy to give to letters any more.
As such it is precious as the sign of an indestructible instinct.
Our day of dependence, our long apprenticeship to the learning of other lands, draws to a close.
In the light of this hope I accept the topic which not only usage but the nature of our association seem to prescribe to this day,--the AMERICAN SCHOLAR.
Year by year we come up hither to read one more chapter of his biography.
Let us inquire what new lights, new events, and more days have thrown on his character, his duties, and his hopes.
The old fable covers a doctrine ever new and sublime; that there is One Man,--present to all particular men only partially, or through one faculty; and that you must take the whole society to find the whole man.
Man is not a farmer, or a professor, or an engineer, but he is all.
Man is priest, and scholar, and statesman, and producer, and soldier.
The fable implies that the individual, to possess himself, must sometimes return from his own labor to embrace all the other laborers.
But, unfortunately, this original unit, this fountain of power, has been so distributed to multitudes, has been so minutely subdivided and peddled out, that it is spilled into drops, and cannot be gathered.
The state of society is one in which the members have suffered amputation from the trunk and strut about so many walking monsters,--a good finger, a neck, a stomach, an elbow, but never a man.
Man is thus metamorphosed into a thing, into many things.
The planter, who is Man sent out into the field to gather food, is seldom cheered by any idea of the true dignity of his ministry.
He sees his bushel and his cart, and nothing beyond, and sinks into the farmer, instead of Man on the farm.
The priest becomes a form; the attorney a statute-book; the mechanic a machine; the sailor a rope of the ship.
In this distribution of functions the scholar is the delegated intellect.
In the degenerate state, when the victim of society, he tends to become a mere thinker, or, still worse, the parrot of other men's thinking.
In this view of him, as Man Thinking, the whole theory of his office is contained.
Is not indeed every man a student, and do not all things exist for the student's behoof?
And, finally, is not the true scholar the only true master?
Let us see him in his school, and consider him in reference to the main influences he receives.
The first in time and the first in importance of the influences upon the mind is that of nature.
Ever the winds blow; ever the grass grows.
Far too as her splendors shine, system on system shooting like rays, upward, downward, without center, without circumference,--in the mass and in the particle, Nature hastens to render account of herself to the mind.
To the young mind everything is individual, stands by itself.
It presently learns that since the dawn of history there has been a constant accumulation and classifying of facts.
But what is classification but the perceiving that these objects are not chaotic, and are not foreign, but have a law which is also a law of the human mind?
The astronomer discovers that geometry, a pure abstraction of the human mind, is the measure of planetary motion.
The chemist finds proportions and intelligible method throughout matter; and science is nothing but the finding of analogy, identity, in the most remote parts.
The ambitious soul sits down before each refractory fact; one after another reduces all strange constitutions, all new powers, to their class and their law, and goes on forever to animate the last fiber of organization, the outskirts of nature, by insight.
Thus to him, to this school-boy under the bending dome of day, is suggested that he and it proceed from one Root; one is leaf and one is flower; relation, sympathy, stirring in every vein.
Is not that the soul of his soul?--A thought too bold?--A dream too wild?
Its beauty is the beauty of his own mind.
Nature then becomes to him the measure of his attainments.
So much of nature as he is ignorant of, so much of his own mind does he not yet possess.
The next great influence into the spirit of the scholar is the mind of the Past,--in whatever form, whether of literature, of art, of institutions, that mind is inscribed.
Books are the best type of the influence of the past, and perhaps we shall get at the truth,--learn the amount of this influence more conveniently,--by considering their value alone.
The scholar of the first age received into him the world around; brooded thereon; gave it the new arrangement of his own mind, and uttered it again.
It came into him life; it went out from him truth.
It came to him short-lived actions; it went out from him immortal thoughts.
It came to him business; it went from him poetry.
It was dead fact; now, it is quick thought.
Or, I might say, it depends on how far the process had gone, of transmuting life into truth.
In proportion to the completeness of the distillation, so will the purity and imperishableness of the product be.
Each age, it is found, must write its own books; or rather, each generation for the next succeeding.
The books of an older period will not fit this.
The sacredness which attaches to the act of creation, the act of thought, is instantly transferred to the record.
The poet chanting was felt to be a divine man.
Henceforward it is settled the book is perfect; as love of the hero corrupts into worship of his statue.
We sought a brother, and lo, a governor.
The sluggish and perverted mind of the multitude, always slow to open to the incursions of Reason, having once so opened, having once received this book, stands upon it, and makes an outcry if it is disparaged.
Books are written on it by thinkers, not by Man Thinking, by men of talent, that is, who start wrong, who set out from accepted dogmas, not from their own sight of principles.
Hence, instead of Man Thinking, we have the bookworm.
This is bad; this is worse than it seems.
Books are the best of things, well used; abused, among the worst.
What is the one end which all means go to effect?
The one thing in the world of value is the active soul,--the soul, free, sovereign, active.
This every man is entitled to; this every man contains within him, although in almost all men obstructed, and as yet unborn.
The soul active sees absolute truth and utters truth, or creates.
The book, the college, the school of art, the institution of any kind, stop with some past utterance of genius.
This is good, say they,--let us hold by this.
The eyes of man are set in his forehead, not in his hindhead.
To create,--to create,--is the proof of a divine presence.
There are creative manners, there are creative actions, and creative words; manners, actions, words, that is, indicative of no custom or authority, but springing spontaneous from the mind's own sense of good and fair.
Undoubtedly there is a right way of reading, so it be sternly subordinated.
Man Thinking must not be subdued by his instruments.
The Arabian proverb says, "A fig-tree, looking on a fig-tree, becometh fruitful."
It is remarkable, the character of the pleasure we derive from the best books.
They impress us ever with the conviction that one nature wrote and the same reads.
There is some awe mixed with the joy of our surprise, when this poet, who lived in some past world, two or three hundred years ago, says that which lies close to my own soul, that which I also had well-nigh thought and said.
I would not be hurried by any love of system, by any exaggeration of instincts, to underrate the Book.
We all know that as the human body can be nourished on any food, though it were boiled grass and the broth of shoes, so the human mind can be fed by any knowledge.
And great and heroic men have existed who had almost no other information than by the printed page.
I only would say that it needs a strong head to bear that diet.
As the proverb says, "He that would bring home the wealth of the Indies must carry out the wealth of the Indies." There is then creative reading as well as creative writing.
When the mind is braced by labor and invention, the page of whatever book we read becomes luminous with manifold allusion.
Every sentence is doubly significant, and the sense of our author is as broad as the world.
We then see, what is always true, that as the seer's hour of vision is short and rare among heavy days and months, so is its record, perchance, the least part of his volume.
Of course there is a portion of reading quite indispensable to a wise man.
History and exact science he must learn by laborious reading.
Colleges, in like manner, have their indispensable office,--to teach elements.
But they can only highly serve us when they aim not to drill, but to create; when they gather from far every ray of various genius to their hospitable halls, and by the concentrated fires set the hearts of their youth on flame.
Thought and knowledge are natures in which apparatus and pretension avail nothing.
They are often virtually disfranchised; and indeed there are advocates for their celibacy.
As far as this is true of the studious classes, it is not just and wise.
Action is with the scholar subordinate, but it is essential.
Without it thought can never ripen into truth.
Whilst the world hangs before the eye as a cloud of beauty, we cannot even see its beauty.
Inaction is cowardice, but there can be no scholar without the heroic mind.
Only so much do I know, as I have lived.
Instantly we know whose words are loaded with life, and whose not.
Its attractions are the keys which unlock my thoughts and make me acquainted with myself.
I launch eagerly into this resounding tumult.
So much only of life as I know by experience, so much of the wilderness have I vanquished and planted, or so far have I extended my being, my dominion.
I do not see how any man can afford, for the sake of his nerves and his nap, to spare any action in which he can partake.
It is pearls and rubies to his discourse.
Drudgery, calamity, exasperation, want, are instructors in eloquence and wisdom.
The true scholar grudges every opportunity of action passed by, as a loss of power.
It is the raw material out of which the intellect molds her splendid products.
The actions and events of our childhood and youth are now matters of calmest observation.
Not so with our recent actions,--with the business which we now have in hand.
On this we are quite unable to speculate.
Our affections as yet circulate through it.
We no more feel or know it than we feel the feet, or the hand, or the brain of our body.
The new deed is yet a part of life,--remains for a time immersed in our unconscious life.
Observe, too, the impossibility of antedating this act.
In its grub state it cannot fly, it cannot shine, it is a dull grub.
But suddenly, without observation, the selfsame thing unfurls beautiful wings, and is an angel of wisdom.
Of course, he who has put forth his total strength in fit actions has the richest return of wisdom.
Authors we have, in numbers, who have written out their vein, and who, moved by a commendable prudence, sail for Greece or Palestine, follow the trapper into the prairie, or ramble round Algiers, to replenish their merchantable stock.
If it were only for a vocabulary, the scholar would be covetous of action.
I learn immediately from any speaker how much he has already lived, through the poverty or the splendor of his speech.
Life lies behind us as the quarry from whence we get tiles and copestones for the masonry of to-day.
Colleges and books only copy the language which the field and the work-yard made.
But the final value of action, like that of books, and better than books, is that it is a resource.
The mind now thinks, now acts, and each fit reproduces the other.
A great soul will be strong to live, as well as strong to think.
Does he lack organ or medium to impart his truth?
He can still fall back on this elemental force of living them.
Let the grandeur of justice shine in his affairs.
Let the beauty of affection cheer his lowly roof.
Those "far from fame," who dwell and act with him, will feel the force of his constitution in the doings and passages of the day better than it can be measured by any public and designed display.
Time shall teach him that the scholar loses no hour which the man lives.
Herein he unfolds the sacred germ of his instinct, screened from influence.
What is lost in seemliness is gained in strength.
I hear therefore with joy whatever is beginning to be said of the dignity and necessity of labor to every citizen.
And labor is everywhere welcome; always we are invited to work; only be this limitation observed, that a man shall not for the sake of wider activity sacrifice any opinion to the popular judgments and modes of action.
I have now spoken of the education of the scholar by nature, by books, and by action.
It remains to say somewhat of his duties.
They may all be comprised in self-trust.
The office of the scholar is to cheer, to raise, and to guide men by showing them facts amidst appearances.
He plies the slow, unhonored, and unpaid task of observation.
In the long period of his preparation he must betray often an ignorance and shiftlessness in popular arts, incurring the disdain of the able who shoulder him aside.
Long he must stammer in his speech; often forego the living for the dead.
Worse yet, he must accept--how often!--poverty and solitude.
For all this loss and scorn, what offset?
He is to find consolation in exercising the highest functions of human nature.
He is one who raises himself from private considerations and breathes and lives on public and illustrious thoughts.
He is to resist the vulgar prosperity that retrogrades ever to barbarism, by preserving and communicating heroic sentiments, noble biographies, melodious verse, and the conclusions of history.
Whatsoever oracles the human heart, in all emergencies, in all solemn hours, has uttered as its commentary on the world of actions,--these he shall receive and impart.
And whatsoever new verdict Reason from her inviolable seat pronounces on the passing men and events of to-day,--this he shall hear and promulgate.
These being his functions, it becomes him to feel all confidence in himself, and to defer never to the popular cry.
The world of any moment is the merest appearance.
The odds are that the whole question is not worth the poorest thought which the scholar has lost in listening to the controversy.
In silence, in steadiness, in severe abstraction, let him hold by himself; add observation to observation, patient of neglect, patient of reproach, and bide his own time,--happy enough if he can satisfy himself alone that this day he has seen something truly.
For the instinct is sure that prompts him to tell his brother what he thinks.
He then learns that in going down into the secrets of his own mind he has descended into the secrets of all minds.
He learns that he who has mastered any law in his private thoughts is master to that extent of all men whose language he speaks, and of all into whose language his own can be translated.
The poet, in utter solitude remembering his spontaneous thoughts and recording them, is found to have recorded that which men in cities vast find true for them also.
The people delight in it; the better part of every man feels--This is my music; this is myself.
In self-trust all the virtues are comprehended.
Free should the scholar be,--free and brave.
Free even to the definition of freedom, "without any hindrance that does not arise out of his own constitution." Brave; for fear is a thing which a scholar by his very function puts behind him.
So is the danger a danger still; so is the fear worse.
The world is his who can see through its pretension.
What deafness, what stone-blind custom, what overgrown error you behold is there only by sufferance,--by your sufferance.
See it to be a lie, and you have already dealt it its mortal blow.
Yes, we are the cowed,--we the trustless.
It is a mischievous notion that we are come late into nature; that the world was finished a long time ago.
As the world was plastic and fluid in the hands of God, so it is ever to so much of his attributes as we bring to it.
Not he is great who can alter matter, but he who can alter my state of mind.
The day is always his who works in it with serenity and great aims.
For this self-trust, the reason is deeper than can be fathomed,--darker than can be enlightened.
I might not carry with me the feeling of my audience in stating my own belief.
But I have already shown the ground of my hope, in adverting to the doctrine that man is one.
I believe man has been wronged; he has wronged himself.
He has almost lost the light that can lead him back to his prerogatives.
What a testimony, full of grandeur, full of pity, is borne to the demands of his own nature, by the poor clansman, the poor partisan, who rejoices in the glory of his chief!
They sun themselves in the great man's light, and feel it to be their own element.
They cast the dignity of man from their downtrod selves upon the shoulders of a hero, and will perish to add one drop of blood to make that great heart beat, those giant sinews combat and conquer.
For they aspire to the highest, and this, in their sleep-walking, they dream is highest.
Wake them and they shall quit the false good and leap to the true, and leave governments to clerks and desks.
This revolution is to be wrought by the gradual domestication of the idea of Culture.
The main enterprise of the world for splendor, for extent, is the upbuilding of a man.
Here are the materials strewn along the ground.
The private life of one man shall be a more illustrious monarchy, more formidable to its enemy, more sweet and serene in its influence to its friend, than any kingdom in history.
Each philosopher, each bard, each actor has only done for me, as by a delegate, what one day I can do for myself.
The books which once we valued more than the apple of the eye, we have quite exhausted.
What is that but saying that we have come up with the point of view which the universal mind took through the eyes of one scribe; we have been that man, and have passed on.
First, one, then another, we drain all cisterns, and waxing greater by all these supplies, we crave a better and a more abundant food.
The man has never lived that can feed us ever.
The human mind cannot be enshrined in a person who shall set a barrier on any one side to this unbounded, unboundable empire.
It is one central fire, which, flaming now out of the lips of Etna, lightens the capes of Sicily, and now out of the throat of Vesuvius, illuminates the towers and vineyards of Naples.
It is one light which beams out of a thousand stars.
But I have dwelt perhaps tediously upon this abstraction of the Scholar.
I ought not to delay longer to add what I have to say of nearer reference to the time and to this country.
In fact, I believe each individual passes through all three.
The boy is a Greek; the youth, romantic; the adult, reflective.
I deny not, however, that a revolution in the leading idea may be distinctly enough traced.
The time is infected with Hamlet's unhappiness,--
Do we fear lest we should outsee nature and God, and drink truth dry?
I look upon the discontent of the literary class as a mere announcement of the fact that they find themselves not in the state of mind of their fathers, and regret the coming state as untried; as a boy dreads the water before he has learned that he can swim.
This time, like all times, is a very good one, if we but know what to do with it.
I read with some joy of the auspicious signs of the coming days, as they glimmer already through poetry and art, through philosophy and science, through church and state.
Instead of the sublime and beautiful, the near, the low, the common, was explored and poetized.
That which had been negligently trodden under foot by those who were harnessing and provisioning themselves for long journeys into far countries, is suddenly found to be richer than all foreign parts.
The literature of the poor, the feelings of the child, the philosophy of the street, the meaning of household life, are the topics of the time.
It is a sign--is it not?--of new vigor when the extremities are made active, when currents of warm life run into the hands and the feet.
I ask not for the great, the remote, the romantic; what is doing in Italy or Arabia; what is Greek art, or Provençal minstrelsy; I embrace the common, I explore and sit at the feet of the familiar, the low.
Give me insight into to-day, and you may have the antique and future worlds.
What would we really know the meaning of?
Man is surprised to find that things near are not less beautiful and wondrous than things remote.
This perception of the worth of the vulgar is fruitful in discoveries.
Goethe, in this very thing the most modern of the moderns, has shown us, as none ever did, the genius of the ancients.
Such an attempt of course must have difficulty which no genius could surmount.
But he saw and showed the connexion between nature and the affections of the soul.
He pierced the emblematic or spiritual character of the visible, audible, tangible world.
Another sign of our times, also marked by an analogous political movement, is the new importance given to the single person.
The scholar is that man who must take up into himself all the ability of the time, all the contributions of the past, all the hopes of the future.
President and Gentlemen, this confidence in the unsearched might of man belongs, by all motives, by all prophecy, by all preparation, to the American Scholar.
We have listened too long to the courtly muses of Europe.
The spirit of the American freeman is already suspected to be timid, imitative, tame.
Public and private avarice make the air we breathe thick and fat.
The scholar is decent, indolent, complaisant.
The mind of this country, taught to aim at low objects, eats upon itself.
There is no work for any one but the decorous and the complaisant.
They did not yet see, and thousands of young men as hopeful now crowding to the barriers for the career do not yet see, that if the single man plant himself indomitably on his instincts, and there abide, the huge world will come round to him.
Patience,--patience; with the shades of all the good and great for company; and for solace the perspective of your own infinite life; and for work the study and the communication of principles, the making those instincts prevalent, the conversion of the world.
Not so, brothers and friends,--please God, ours shall not be so.
We will walk on our own feet; we will work with our own hands; we will speak our own minds.
Then shall man be no longer a name for pity, for doubt, and for sensual indulgence.
The dread of man and the love of man shall be a wall of defense and a wreath of joy around all.
A nation of men will for the first time exist, because each believes himself inspired by the Divine Soul which also inspires all men.
The wings of Time are black and white, Pied with morning and with night.
Mountain tall and ocean deep Trembling balance duly keep.
In changing moon, in tidal wave, Glows the feud of Want and Have.
Gauge of more and less through space Electric star and pencil plays.
The lonely Earth amid the balls That hurry through the eternal halls, A makeweight flying to the void, Supplemental asteroid, Or compensatory spark, Shoots across the neutral Dark.
Man's the elm, and Wealth the vine, Stanch and strong the tendrils twine; Through the frail ringlets thee deceive, None from its stock that vine can reave.
Fear not, then, thou child infirm, There's no god dare wrong a worm.
Laurel crowns cleave to deserts, And power to him who power exerts; Hast not thy share?
On winged feet, Lo! it rushes thee to meet; And all that Nature made thy own, Floating in air or pent in stone, Will rive the hills and swim the sea, And, like thy shadow, follow thee.
Ever since I was a boy, I have wished to write a discourse on Compensation: for it seemed to me when very young, that on this subject life was ahead of theology, and the people knew more than the preachers taught.
I was lately confirmed in these desires by hearing a sermon at church.
The preacher, a man esteemed for his orthodoxy, unfolded in the ordinary manner the doctrine of the Last Judgment.
No offense appeared to be taken by the congregation at this doctrine.
As far as I could observe, when the meeting broke up, they separated without remark on the sermon.
Yet what was the import of this teaching?
What did the preacher mean by saying that the good are miserable in the present life?
This must be the compensation intended; for what else?
Is it that they are to have leave to pray and praise? to love and serve men?
The fallacy lay in the immense concession that the bad are successful; that justice is not done now.
I find a similar base tone in the popular religious works of the day, and the same doctrines assumed by the literary men when occasionally they treat the related topics.
I think that our popular theology has gained in decorum, and not in principle, over the superstitions it has displaced.
Every ingenuous and aspiring soul leaves the doctrine behind him in his own experience; and all men feel sometimes the falsehood which they cannot demonstrate.
That which they hear in schools and pulpits without afterthought, if said in conversation, would probably be questioned in silence.
If a man dogmatize in a mixed company on Providence and the divine laws, he is answered by a silence which conveys well enough to an observer the dissatisfaction of the hearer, but his incapacity to make his own statement.
I shall attempt in this and the following chapter to record some facts that indicate the path of the law of Compensation; happy beyond my expectation, if I shall truly draw the smallest arc of this circle.
Superinduce magnetism at one end of a needle; the opposite magnetism takes place at the other end.
If the south attracts, the north repels.
An inevitable dualism bisects nature, so that each thing is a half, and suggests another thing to make it whole; as, spirit, matter; man, woman; odd, even; subjective, objective; in, out; upper, under; motion, rest; yea, nay.
Whilst the world is thus dual, so is every one of its parts.
The entire system of things gets represented in every particle.
There is somewhat that resembles the ebb and flow of the sea, day and night, man and woman, in a single needle of the pine, in a kernel of corn, in each individual of every animal tribe.
The reaction, so grand in the elements, is repeated within these small boundaries.
For example, in the animal kingdom the physiologist has observed that no creatures are favorites, but a certain compensation balances every gift and every defect.
A surplusage given to one part is paid out of a reduction from another part of the same creature.
If the head and neck are enlarged, the trunk and extremities are cut short.
The theory of the mechanic forces is another example.
What we gain in power is lost in time; and the converse.
The periodic or compensating errors of the planets is another instance.
The influences of climate and soil in political history is another.
The barren soil does not breed fevers, crocodiles, tigers, or scorpions.
The same dualism underlies the nature and condition of man.
Every excess causes a defect; every defect an excess.
Every sweet hath its sour; every evil its good.
Every faculty which is a receiver of pleasure has an equal penalty put on its abuse.
It is to answer for its moderation with its life.
For every grain of wit there is a grain of folly.
For everything you have missed, you have gained something else; and for everything you gain, you lose something.
If the gatherer gathers too much, nature takes out of the man what she puts into his chest, swells the estate, but kills the owner.
The waves of the sea do not more speedily seek a level from their loftiest tossing, than the varieties of condition tend to equalize themselves.
There is always some leveling circumstance that puts down the overbearing, the strong, the rich, the fortunate, substantially on the same ground with all others.
The farmer imagines power and place are fine things.
Or, do men desire the more substantial and permanent grandeur of genius?
With every influx of light comes new danger.
Has he light? he must bear witness to the light, and always outrun that sympathy which gives him such keen satisfaction, by his fidelity to new revelations of the incessant soul.
He must hate father and mother, wife and child.
Has he all that the world loves and admires and covets?--he must cast behind him their admiration, and afflict them by faithfulness to his truth, and become a by-word and a hissing.
This law writes the laws of cities and nations.
It is in vain to build or plot or combine against it.
If the government is cruel, the governor's life is not safe.
If you tax too high, the revenue will yield nothing.
If you make the criminal code sanguinary, juries will not convict.
If the law is too mild, private vengeance comes in.
If the government is a terrific democracy, the pressure is resisted by an overcharge of energy in the citizen, and life glows with a fiercer flame.
The true life and satisfactions of man seem to elude the utmost rigors or felicities of condition, and to establish themselves with great indifferency under all varieties of circumstances.
Under all governments the influence of character remains the same,--in Turkey and in New England about alike.
Under the primeval despots of Egypt, history honestly confesses that man must have been as free as culture could make him.
These appearances indicate the fact that the universe is represented in every one of its particles.
Everything in nature contains all the powers of nature.
Everything is made of one hidden stuff; as the naturalist sees one type under every metamorphosis, and regards a horse as a running man, a fish as a swimming man, a bird as a flying man, a tree as a rooted man.
Each new form repeats not only the main character of the type, but part for part all the details, all the aims, furtherances, hindrances, energies, and whole system of every other.
Every occupation, trade, art, transaction, is a compend of the world and a correlative of every other.
Each one is an entire emblem of human life; of its good and ill, its trials, its enemies, its course and its end.
And each one must somehow accommodate the whole man, and recite all his destiny.
If the good is there, so is the evil; if the affinity, so the repulsion; if the force, so the limitation.
That soul, which within us is a sentiment, outside of us is a law.
We feel its inspiration; out there in history we can see its fatal strength. "It is in the world, and the world was made by it." Justice is not postponed.
The world looks like a multiplication table, or a mathematical equation, which, turn it how you will, balances itself.
Take what figure you will, its exact value, nor more nor less, still returns to you.
Every secret is told, every crime is punished, every virtue rewarded, every wrong redressed, in silence and certainty.
What we call retribution is the universal necessity by which the whole appears wherever a part appears.
If you see a hand or limb, you know that the trunk to which it belongs is there behind.
Every act rewards itself, or, in other words, integrates itself, in a twofold manner; first, in the thing, or in real nature; and secondly, in the circumstance, or in apparent nature.
Men call the circumstance the retribution.
The causal retribution is in the thing, and is seen by the soul.
The retribution in the circumstance is seen by the understanding; it is inseparable from the thing, but is often spread over a long time, and so does not become distinct until after many years.
The specific stripes may follow late after the offense, but they follow because they accompany it.
Crime and punishment grow out of one stem.
Punishment is a fruit that unsuspected ripens within the flower of the pleasure which concealed it.
Cause and effect, means and ends, seed and fruit, cannot be severed; for the effect already blooms in the cause, the end preëxists in the means, the fruit in the seed.
Whilst thus the world will be whole, and refuses to be disparted, we seek to act partially, to sunder, to appropriate; for example,--to gratify the senses, we sever the pleasure of the senses from the needs of the character.
The soul says, Eat; the body would feast.
The soul says, The man and woman shall be one flesh and one soul; the body would join the flesh only.
The soul says, Have dominion over all things to the ends of virtue; the body would have the power over things to its own ends.
All things shall be added unto it,--power, pleasure, knowledge, beauty.
The particular man aims to be somebody; to set up for himself; to truck and higgle for a private good; and, in particulars, to ride, that he may ride; to dress, that he may be dressed; to eat, that he may eat; and to govern, that he may be seen.
Men seek to be great; they would have offices, wealth, power, and fame.
They think that to be great is to possess one side of nature,--the sweet, without the other side,--the bitter.
This dividing and detaching is steadily counteracted.
Up to this day, it must be owned, no projector has had the smallest success.
The parted water reunites behind our hand.
Pleasure is taken out of pleasant things, profit out of profitable things, power out of strong things, as soon as we seek to separate them from the whole.
Life invests itself with inevitable conditions, which the unwise seek to dodge, which one and another brags that he does not know; that they do not touch him;--but the brag is on his lips, the conditions are in his soul.
If he escapes them in one part, they attack him in another more vital part.
If he has escaped them in form, and in the appearance, it is because he has resisted his life, and fled from himself, and the retribution is so much death.
The human soul is true to these facts in the painting of fable, of history, of law, of proverbs, of conversation.
It finds a tongue in literature unawares.
He cannot get his own thunders; Minerva keeps the key of them.
"Of all the gods, I only know the keys That ope the solid doors within whose vaults His thunders sleep."
A plain confession of the in-working of the All, and of its moral aim.
The Indian mythology ends in the same ethics; and it would seem impossible for any fable to be invented to get any currency which was not moral.
There is a crack in everything God has made.
This voice of fable has in it somewhat divine.
It came from thought above the will of the writer.
The name and circumstance of Phidias, however convenient for history, embarrass when we come to the highest criticism.
We are to see that which man was tending to do in a given period, and was hindered, or, if you will, modified in doing, by the interfering volitions of Phidias, of Dante, of Shakespeare, the organ whereby man at the moment wrought.
Still more striking is the expression of this fact in the proverbs of all nations, which are always the literature of reason, or the statements of an absolute truth, without qualification.
Proverbs, like the sacred books of each nation, are the sanctuary of the intuitions.
That which the droning world, chained to appearances, will not allow the realist to say in his own words, it will suffer him to say in proverbs without contradiction.
And this law of laws which the pulpit, the senate, and the college deny, is hourly preached in all markets and workshops by flights of proverbs, whose teaching is as true and as omnipresent as that of birds and flies.
It is thus written, because it is thus in life.
Our action is overmastered and characterized above our will by the law of nature.
We aim at a petty end quite aside from the public good, but our act arranges itself by irresistible magnetism in a line with the poles of the world.
A man cannot speak but he judges himself.
With his will, or against his will, he draws his portrait to the eye of his companions by every word.
Every opinion reacts on him who utters it.
It is a thread-ball thrown at a mark, but the other end remains in the thrower's bag.
Or, rather, it is a harpoon hurled at the whale, unwinding, as it flies, a coil of cord in the boat, and if the harpoon is not good, or not well thrown, it will go nigh to cut the steersman in twain, or to sink the boat.
The exclusionist in religion does not see that he shuts the door of heaven on himself, in striving to shut out others.
If you leave out their heart, you shall lose your own.
The senses would make things of all persons; of women, of children, of the poor.
The vulgar proverb, "I will get it from his purse or get it from his skin," is sound philosophy.
All infractions of love and equity in our social relations are speedily punished.
Whilst I stand in simple relations to my fellow-man, I have no displeasure in meeting him.
We meet as water meets water, or as two currents of air mix, with perfect diffusion and interpenetration of nature.
All the old abuses in society, universal and particular, all unjust accumulations of property and power, are avenged in the same manner.
Fear is an instructor of great sagacity, and the herald of all revolutions.
One thing he teaches, that there is rottenness where he appears.
He is a carrion crow, and though you see not well what he hovers for, there is death somewhere.
Our property is timid, our laws are timid, our cultivated classes are timid.
Fear for ages has boded and mowed and gibbered over government and property.
He indicates great wrongs which must be revised.
Of the like nature is that expectation of change which instantly follows the suspension of our voluntary activity.
Has a man gained anything who has received a hundred favors and rendered none?
Has he gained by borrowing, through indolence or cunning, his neighbor's wares, or horses, or money?
There arises on the deed the instant acknowledgment of benefit on the one part, and of debt on the other; that is, of superiority and inferiority.
The transaction remains in the memory of himself and his neighbor; and every new transaction alters, according to its nature, their relation to each other.
He may soon come to see that he had better have broken his own bones than to have ridden in his neighbor's coach, and that "the highest price he can pay for a thing is to ask for it."
A wise man will extend this lesson to all parts of life, and know that it is the part of prudence to face every claimant, and pay every just demand on your time, your talents, or your heart.
Always pay; for, first or last, you must pay your entire debt.
Persons and events may stand for a time between you and justice, but it is only a postponement.
If you are wise, you will dread a prosperity which only loads you with more.
But for every benefit which you receive, a tax is levied.
He is great who confers the most benefits.
He is base--and that is the one base thing in the universe--to receive favors and render none.
Beware of too much good staying in your hand.
Labor is watched over by the same pitiless laws.
Cheapest, say the prudent, is the dearest labor.
What we buy in a broom, a mat, a wagon, a knife, is some application of good sense to a common want.
So do you multiply your presence, or spread yourself throughout your estate.
But because of the dual constitution of things, in labor as in life there can be no cheating.
For the real price of labor is knowledge and virtue, whereof wealth and credit are signs.
These signs, like paper money, may be counterfeited or stolen, but that which they represent, namely, knowledge and virtue, cannot be counterfeited or stolen.
These ends of labor cannot be answered but by real exertions of the mind, and in obedience to pure motives.
The cheat, the defaulter, the gambler, cannot extort the knowledge of material and moral nature which his honest care and pains yield to the operative.
The law of nature is, Do the thing, and you shall have the power: but they who do not the thing have not the power.
Human labor, through all its forms, from the sharpening of a stake to the construction of a city or an epic, is one immense illustration of the perfect compensation of the universe.
The league between virtue and nature engages all things to assume a hostile front to vice.
The beautiful laws and substances of the world persecute and whip the traitor.
He finds that things are arranged for truth and benefit, but there is no den in the wide world to hide a rogue.
Commit a crime, and it seems as if a coat of snow fell on the ground, such as reveals in the woods the track of every partridge and fox and squirrel and mole.
Some damning circumstance always transpires.
The laws and substances of nature--water, snow, wind, gravitation--become penalties to the thief.
On the other hand, the law holds with equal sureness for all right action.
All love is mathematically just, as much as the two sides of an algebraic equation.
"Winds blow and waters roll Strength to the brave, and power and deity, Yet in themselves are nothing."
The good are befriended even by weakness and defect.
As no man had ever a point of pride that was not injurious to him, so no man had ever a defect that was not somewhere made useful to him.
Every man in his lifetime needs to thank his faults.
As no man thoroughly understands a truth until he has contended against it, so no man has a thorough acquaintance with the hindrances or talents of men, until he has suffered from the one, and seen the triumph of the other over his own want of the same.
Has he a defect of temper that unfits him to live in society?
Thereby he is driven to entertain himself alone, and acquire habits of self-help; and thus, like the wounded oyster, he mends his shell with pearl.
The indignation which arms itself with secret forces does not awaken until we are pricked and stung and sorely assailed.
A great man is always willing to be little.
Whilst he sits on the cushion of advantages, he goes to sleep.
When he is punished, tormented, defeated, he has a chance to learn something; he has been put on his wits, on his manhood; he has gained facts; learns his ignorance; is cured of the insanity of conceit; has got moderation and real skill.
The wise man throws himself on the side of his assailants.
It is more his interest than it is theirs to find his weak point.
The wound cicatrizes and falls off from him like a dead skin, and when they would triumph, lo! he has passed on invulnerable.
As long as all that is said is said against me, I feel a certain assurance of success.
But as soon as honeyed words of praise are spoken for me, I feel as one that lies unprotected before his enemies.
In general, every evil to which we do not succumb is a benefactor.
As the Sandwich Islander believes that the strength and valor of the enemy he kills passes into himself, so we gain the strength of the temptation we resist.
The same guards which protect us from disaster, defect, and enmity, defend us, if we will, from selfishness and fraud.
Bolts and bars are not the best of our institutions, nor is shrewdness in trade a mark of wisdom.
Men suffer all their life long, under the foolish superstition that they can be cheated.
There is a third silent party to all our bargains.
The nature and soul of things takes on itself the guaranty of the fulfillment of every contract, so that honest service cannot come to loss.
If you serve an ungrateful master, serve him the more.
The history of persecution is a history of endeavors to cheat nature, to make water run up hill, to twist a rope of sand.
It makes no difference whether the actors be many or one, a tyrant or a mob.
The mob is man voluntarily descending to the nature of the beast.
Its actions are insane like its whole constitution; it persecutes a principle; it would whip a right; it would tar and feather justice, by inflicting fire and outrage upon the houses and persons of those who have these.
It resembles the prank of boys, who run with fire engines to put out the ruddy aurora streaming to the stars.
The inviolate spirit turns their spite against the wrongdoers.
Every lash inflicted is a tongue of fame; every prison, a more illustrious abode; every burned book or house enlightens the world; every suppressed or expunged word reverberates through the earth from side to side.
Hours of sanity and consideration are always arriving to communities, as to individuals, when the truth is seen, and the martyrs are justified.
Thus do all things preach the indifferency of circumstances.
Everything has two sides, a good and an evil.
But the doctrine of compensation is not the doctrine of indifferency.
The thoughtless say, on hearing these representations, What boots it to do well? there is one event to good and evil; if I gain any good, I must pay for it; if I lose any good, I gain some other; all actions are indifferent.
There is a deeper fact in the soul than compensation, to wit, its own nature.
The soul is not a compensation, but a life.
Under all this running sea of circumstance, whose waters ebb and flow with perfect balance, lies the aboriginal abyss of real Being.
Essence, or God, is not a relation, or a part, but the whole.
Being is the vast affirmative, excluding negation, self-balanced, and swallowing up all relations, parts, and times within itself.
Nature, truth, virtue, are the influx from thence.
Vice is the absence or departure of the same.
Nothing, Falsehood, may indeed stand as the great Night or shade, on which, as a background, the living universe paints itself forth, but no fact is begotten by it; it cannot work, for it is not.
It cannot work any good; it cannot work any harm.
It is harm inasmuch as it is worse not to be than to be.
We feel defrauded of the retribution due to evil acts, because the criminal adheres to his vice and contumacy, and does not come to a crisis or judgment anywhere in visible nature.
There is no stunning confutation of his nonsense before men and angels.
Inasmuch as he carries the malignity and the lie with him, he so far deceases from nature.
In some manner there will be a demonstration of the wrong to the understanding also; but should we not see it, this deadly deduction makes square the eternal account.
Neither can it be said, on the other hand, that the gain of rectitude must be bought by any loss.
There is no penalty to virtue; no penalty to wisdom; they are proper additions of being.
There can be no excess to love; none to knowledge; none to beauty, when these attributes are considered in the purest sense.
Man's life is a progress, and not a station.
There is no tax on the good of virtue; for that is the incoming of God himself, or absolute existence without any comparative.
Material good has its tax, and if it came without desert or sweat, has no root in me, and the next wind will blow it away.
But all the good of nature is the soul's, and may be had, if paid for in nature's lawful coin, that is, by labor which the heart and the head allow.
I no longer wish to meet a good I do not earn; for example, to find a pot of buried gold, knowing that it brings with it new burdens.
I do not wish more external goods,--neither possessions, nor honors, nor powers, nor persons.
The gain is apparent; the tax is certain.
But there is no tax on the knowledge that the compensation exists, and that it is not desirable to dig up treasure.
Herein I rejoice with a serene eternal peace.
I contract the boundaries of possible mischief.
In the nature of the soul is the compensation for the inequalities of condition.
The radical tragedy of nature seems to be the distinction of More and Less.
How can Less not feel the pain; how not feel indignation or malevolence towards More?
Look at those who have less faculty, and one feels sad, and knows not well what to make of it.
He almost shuns their eye; he fears they will upbraid God.
But see the facts nearly, and these mountainous inequalities vanish.
Love reduces them, as the sun melts the iceberg in the sea.
If I feel overshadowed and outdone by great neighbors, I can yet love; I can still receive; and he that loveth maketh his own the grandeur he loves.
Thereby I make the discovery that my brother is my guardian, acting for me with the friendliest designs, and the estate I so admired and envied is my own.
It is the nature of the soul to appropriate all things.
His wit,--if it cannot be made mine, it is not wit.
Such, also, is the natural history of calamity.
The changes which break up at short intervals the prosperity of men are advertisements of a nature whose law is growth.
Every soul is by this intrinsic necessity quitting its whole system of things, its friends, and home, and laws, and faith, as the shellfish crawls out of its beautiful but stony case, because it no longer admits of its growth, and slowly forms a new house.
Then there can be enlargement, and the man of to-day scarcely recognizes the man of yesterday.
And such should be the outward biography of man in time, a putting off of dead circumstances day by day, as he renews his raiment day by day.
But to us, in our lapsed estate, resting, not advancing, resisting, not coöperating with the divine expansion, this growth comes by shocks.
We do not see that they only go out, that archangels may come in.
We do not believe in the riches of the soul, in its proper eternity and omnipresence.
We do not believe there is any force in to-day to rival or recreate that beautiful yesterday.
We linger in the ruins of the old tent, where once we had bread and shelter and organs, nor believe that the spirit can feed, cover, and nerve us again.
We cannot again find aught so dear, so sweet, so graceful.
The voice of the Almighty saith, "Up and onward forevermore!" We cannot stay amid the ruins.
Neither will we rely on the new; and so we walk ever with reverted eyes, like those monsters who look backwards.
And yet the compensations of calamity are made apparent to the understanding also, after long intervals of time.
A fever, a mutilation, a cruel disappointment, a loss of wealth, a loss of friends, seems at the moment unpaid loss, and unpayable.
But the sure years reveal the deep remedial force that underlies all facts.
"Man is his own star; and the soul that can Render an honest and a perfect man, Commands all light, all influence, all fate; Nothing to him falls early or too late.
I read the other day some verses written by an eminent painter which were original and not conventional.
The soul always hears an admonition in such lines, let the subject be what it may.
The sentiment they instill is of more value than any thought they may contain.
A man should learn to detect and watch that gleam of light which flashes across his mind from within, more than the luster of the firmament of bards and sages.
Yet he dismisses without notice his thought, because it is his.
Great works of art have no more affecting lesson for us than this.
Else, to-morrow a stranger will say with masterly good sense precisely what we have thought and felt all the time, and we shall be forced to take with shame our own opinion from another.
The power which resides in him is new in nature, and none but he knows what that is which he can do, nor does he know until he has tried.
Not for nothing one face, one character, one fact, makes much impression on him, and another none.
This sculpture in the memory is not without preëstablished harmony.
The eye was placed where one ray should fall, that it might testify of that particular ray.
It may be safely trusted as proportionate and of good issues, so it be faithfully imparted, but God will not have his work made manifest by cowards.
A man is relieved and gay when he has put his heart into his work and done his best; but what he has said or done otherwise shall give him no peace.
It is a deliverance which does not deliver.
In the attempt his genius deserts him; no muse befriends; no invention, no hope.
Accept the place the divine providence has found for you, the society of your contemporaries, the connection of events.
Great men have always done so, and confided themselves childlike to the genius of their age, betraying their perception that the absolutely trustworthy was seated at their heart, working through their hands, predominating in all their being.
What pretty oracles nature yields us on this text, in the face and behavior of children, babes, and even brutes!
Their mind being whole, their eye is as yet unconquered, and when we look in their faces we are disconcerted.
So God has armed youth and puberty and manhood no less with its own piquancy and charm, and made it enviable and gracious and its claims not to be put by, if it will stand by itself.
Do not think the youth has no force, because he cannot speak to you and me.
Hark! in the next room his voice is sufficiently clear and emphatic.
It seems he knows how to speak to his contemporaries.
Bashful or bold, then, he will know how to make us seniors very unnecessary.
He cumbers himself never about consequences about interests; he gives an independent, genuine verdict.
You must court him: he does not court you.
But the man is, as it were, clapped into jail by his consciousness.
Ah, that he could pass again into his neutrality!
He would utter opinions on all passing affairs, which being seen to be not private, but necessary, would sink like darts into the ear of men, and put them in fear.
These are the voices which we hear in solitude, but they grow faint and inaudible as we enter into the world.
Society everywhere is in conspiracy against the manhood of every one of its members.
Society is a joint-stock company, in which the members agree, for the better securing of his bread to each shareholder, to surrender the liberty and culture of the eater.
The virtue in most request is conformity.
It loves not realities and creators, but names and customs.
I remember an answer which when quite young I was prompted to make to a valued adviser, who was wont to importune me with the dear old doctrines of the church.
A man is to carry himself in the presence of all opposition, as if everything were titular and ephemeral but he.
I am ashamed to think how easily we capitulate to badges and names, to large societies and dead institutions.
Every decent and well-spoken individual affects and sways me more than is right.
I ought to go upright and vital, and speak the rude truth in all ways.
If malice and vanity wear the coat of philanthropy, shall that pass?
Thy love afar is spite at home." Rough and graceless would be such greeting, but truth is handsomer than the affectation of love.
Your goodness must have some edge to it,--else it is none.
The doctrine of hatred must be preached as the counteraction of the doctrine of love when that pules and whines.
I shun father and mother and wife and brother, when my genius calls me.
Expect me not to show cause why I seek or why I exclude company.
Then, again, do not tell me, as a good man did to-day, of my obligation to put all poor men in good situations.
I tell thee, thou foolish philanthropist, that I grudge the dollar, the dime, the cent, I give to such men as do not belong to me and to whom I do not belong.
Virtues are, in the popular estimate, rather the exception than the rule.
Men do what is called a good action, as some piece of courage or charity, much as they would pay a fine in expiation of daily non-appearance on parade.
Their works are done as an apology or extenuation of their living in the world,--as invalids and the insane pay a high board.
My life is for itself and not for a spectacle.
I much prefer that it should be of a lower strain, so it be genuine and equal, than that it should be glittering and unsteady.
I know that for myself it makes no difference whether I do or forbear those actions which are reckoned excellent.
I cannot consent to pay for a privilege where I have intrinsic right.
Few and mean as my gifts may be, I actually am, and do not need for my own assurance or the assurance of my fellows any secondary testimony.
What I must do is all that concerns me, not what the people think.
This rule, equally arduous in actual and in intellectual life, may serve for the whole distinction between greatness and meanness.
It is the harder, because you will always find those who think they know what is your duty better than you know it.
The objection to conforming to usages that have become dead to you is, that it scatters your force.
It loses your time and blurs the impression of your character.
And, of course, so much force is withdrawn from your proper life.
A man must consider what a blindman's-buff is this game of conformity.
If I know your sect, I anticipate your argument.
I hear a preacher announce for his text and topic the expediency of one of the institutions of his church.
Do I not know beforehand that not possibly can he say a new and spontaneous word?
Do I not know that he is pledged to himself not to look but at one side,--the permitted side, not as a man, but as a parish minister?
Their two is not the real two, their four not the real four; so that every word they say chagrins us, and we know not where to begin to set them right.
Meantime nature is not slow to equip us in the prison-uniform of the party to which we adhere.
We come to wear one cut of face and figure, and acquire by degrees the gentlest asinine expression.
The muscles, not spontaneously moved, but moved by a low usurping willfulness, grow tight about the outline of the face with the most disagreeable sensation.
The bystanders look askance on him in the public street or in the friend's parlor.
It is easy enough for a firm man who knows the world to brook the rage of the cultivated classes.
Their rage is decorous and prudent, for they are timid as being very vulnerable themselves.
But why should you keep your head over your shoulder?
Suppose you should contradict yourself; what then?
It seems to be a rule of wisdom never to rely on your memory alone, scarcely even in acts of pure memory, but to bring the past for judgment into the thousand-eyed present, and live ever in a new day.
In your metaphysics you have denied personality to the Deity; yet when the devout motions of the soul come, yield to them heart and life, though they should clothe God with shape and color.
A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds, adored by little statesmen and philosophers and divines.
With consistency a great soul has simply nothing to do.
He may as well concern himself with the shadow on the wall.
Speak what you think now in hard words, and to-morrow speak what to-morrow thinks in hard words again, though it contradict everything you said to-day.--"Ah, so you shall be sure to be misunderstood."--Is it so bad, then, to be misunderstood?
I suppose no man can violate his nature.
Nor does it matter how you gauge and try him.
In this pleasing, contrite wood-life which God allows me, let me record day by day my honest thought without prospect or retrospect, and, I cannot doubt, it will be found symmetrical, though I mean it not, and see it not.
My book should smell of pines and resound with the hum of insects.
The swallow over my window should interweave that thread or straw he carries in his bill into my web also.
Men imagine that they communicate their virtue or vice only by overt actions, and do not see that virtue or vice emit a breath every moment.
There will be an agreement in whatever variety of actions, so they be each honest and natural in their hour.
For of one will, the actions will be harmonious, however unlike they seem.
These varieties are lost sight of at a little distance, at a little height of thought.
Your genuine action will explain itself, and will explain your other genuine actions.
Act singly, and what you have already done singly will justify you now.
Always scorn appearances, and you always may.
All the foregone days of virtue work their health into this.
What makes the majesty of the heroes of the senate and the field, which so fills the imagination?
The consciousness of a train of great days and victories behind.
They shed an united light on the advancing actor.
He is attended as by a visible escort of angels.
Honor is venerable to us because it is no ephemeris.
We worship it to-day because it is not of to-day.
We love it and pay it homage, because it is not a trap for our love and homage, but is self-dependent, self-derived, and therefore of an old immaculate pedigree, even if shown in a young person.
I hope in these days we have heard the last of conformity and consistency.
Let the words be gazetted and ridiculous henceforward.
A great man is coming to eat at my house.
I do not wish to please him; I wish that he should wish to please me.
I will stand here for humanity, and though I would make it kind, I would make it true.
He measures you, and all men, and all events.
Ordinarily, everybody in society reminds us of somewhat else, or of some other person.
Character, reality, reminds you of nothing else; it takes place of the whole creation.
The man must be so much, that he must make all circumstances indifferent.
Every true man is a cause, a country, and an age; requires infinite spaces and numbers and time fully to accomplish his design;--and posterity seem to follow his steps as a train of clients.
Christ is born, and millions of minds so grow and cleave to his genius, that he is confounded with virtue and the possible of man.
Let a man then know his worth, and keep things under his feet.
Let him not peep or steal, or skulk up and down with the air of a charity-boy, a bastard, or an interloper, in the world which exists for him.
But the man in the street, finding no worth in himself which corresponds to the force which built a tower or sculptured a marble god, feels poor when he looks on these.
The picture waits for my verdict: it is not to command me, but I am to settle its claims to praise.
Our reading is mendicant and sycophantic.
In history, our imagination plays us false.
Kingdom and lordship, power and estate, are a gaudier vocabulary than private John and Edward in a small house and common day's work; but the things of life are the same to both; the sum total of both is the same.
As great a stake depends on your private act to-day, as followed their public and renowned steps.
When private men shall act with original views, the luster will be transferred from the actions of kings to those of gentlemen.
The world has been instructed by its kings, who have so magnetized the eyes of nations.
It has been taught by this colossal symbol the mutual reverence that is due from man to man.
The magnetism which all original action exerts is explained when we inquire the reason of self-trust.
What is the aboriginal Self, on which a universal reliance may be grounded?
The inquiry leads us to that source, at once the essence of genius, of virtue, and of life, which we call Spontaneity or Instinct.
We denote this primary wisdom as Intuition, whilst all later teachings are tuitions.
In that deep force, the last fact behind which analysis cannot go, all things find their common origin.
For the sense of being which in calm hours rises, we know not how, in the soul, is not diverse from things, from space, from light, from time, from man, but one with them, and proceeds obviously from the same source whence their life and being also proceed.
We first share the life by which things exist, and afterwards see them as appearances in nature, and forget that we have shared their cause.
Here is the fountain of action and of thought.
Here are the lungs of that inspiration which giveth man wisdom, and which cannot be denied without impiety and atheism.
We lie in the lap of immense intelligence, which makes us receivers of its truth and organs of its activity.
When we discern justice, when we discern truth, we do nothing of ourselves, but allow a passage to its beams.
If we ask whence this comes, if we seek to pry into the soul that causes, all philosophy is at fault.
Its presence or its absence is all we can affirm.
Every man discriminates between the voluntary acts of his mind, and his involuntary perceptions, and knows that to his involuntary perceptions a perfect faith is due.
He may err in the expression of them, but he knows that these things are so, like day and night, not to be disputed.
My willful actions and acquisitions are but roving;--the idlest reverie, the faintest native emotion, command my curiosity and respect.
Thoughtless people contradict as readily the statement of perceptions as of opinions, or rather much more readily; for, they do not distinguish between perception and notion.
They fancy that I choose to see this or that thing.
But perception is not whimsical, it is fatal.
If I see a trait, my children will see it after me, and in course of time, all mankind,--although it may chance that no one has seen it before me.
For my perception of it is as much a fact as the sun.
The relations of the soul to the divine spirit are so pure, that it is profane to seek to interpose helps.
It must be that when God speaketh he should communicate, not one thing, but all things; should fill the world with his voice; should scatter forth light, nature, time, souls, from the center of the present thought; and new date and new create the whole.
Whenever a mind is simple, and receives a divine wisdom, old things pass away,--means, teachers, texts, temples, fall; it lives now, and absorbs past and future into the present hour.
All things are made sacred by relation to it,--one as much as another.
All things are dissolved to their center by their cause, and, in the universal miracle, petty and particular miracles disappear.
If, therefore, a man claims to know and speak of God, and carries you backward to the phraseology of some old moldered nation in another country, in another world, believe him not.
Is the acorn better than the oak which is its fullness and completion?
Man is timid and apologetic; he is no longer upright; he dares not say "I think," "I am," but quotes some saint or sage.
He is ashamed before the blade of grass or the blowing rose.
These roses under my window make no reference to former roses or to better ones; they are for what they are; they exist with God to-day.
There is simply the rose; it is perfect in every moment of its existence.
Before a leaf-bud has burst, its whole life acts; in the full-blown flower there is no more; in the leafless root there is no less.
Its nature is satisfied, and it satisfies nature, in all moments alike.
But man postpones, or remembers; he does not live in the present, but with a reverted eye laments the past, or, heedless of the riches that surround him, stands on tiptoe to foresee the future.
He cannot be happy and strong until he too lives with nature in the present, above time.
Yet see what strong intellects dare not yet hear God himself, unless he speak the phraseology of I know not what David, or Jeremiah, or Paul.
It is as easy for the strong man to be strong, as it is for the weak to be weak.
When we have new perception, we shall gladly disburden the memory of its hoarded treasures as old rubbish.
When a man lives with God, his voice shall be as sweet as the murmur of the brook and the rustle of the corn.
And now at last the highest truth on this subject remains unsaid; probably cannot be said; for all that we say is the far-off remembering of the intuition.
That thought, by what I can now nearest approach to say it, is this.
It shall exclude example and experience.
All persons that ever existed are its forgotten ministers.
In the hour of vision, there is nothing that can be called gratitude, nor properly joy.
The soul raised over passion beholds identity and eternal causation, perceives the self-existence of Truth and Right, and calms itself with knowing that all things go well.
Vast spaces of nature, the Atlantic Ocean, the South Sea,--long intervals of time, years, centuries,--are of no account.
This which I think and feel underlay every former state of life and circumstances, as it does underlie my present, and what is called life, and what is called death.
Power ceases in the instant of repose; it resides in the moment of transition from a past to a new state, in the shooting of the gulf, in the darting to an aim.
Why, then, do we prate of self-reliance?
Speak rather of that which relies, because it works and is.
Who has more obedience than I masters me, though he should not raise his finger.
Round him I must revolve by the gravitation of spirits.
We fancy it rhetoric, when we speak of eminent virtue.
We do not yet see that virtue is Height, and that a man or a company of men, plastic and permeable to principles, by the law of nature must overpower and ride all cities, nations, kings, rich men, poets, who are not.
This is the ultimate fact which we so quickly reach on this, as on every topic, the resolution of all into the ever-blessed ONE.
Self-existence is the attribute of the Supreme Cause, and it constitutes the measure of good by the degree in which it enters into all lower forms.
All things real are so by so much virtue as they contain.
Commerce, husbandry, hunting, whaling, war eloquence, personal weight, are somewhat, and engage my respect as examples of its presence and impure action.
I see the same law working in nature for conservation and growth.
Power is in nature the essential measure of right.
Nature suffers nothing to remain in her kingdoms which cannot help itself.
The genesis and maturation of a planet, its poise and orbit, the bended tree recovering itself from the strong wind, the vital resources of every animal and vegetable, are demonstrations of the self-sufficing, and therefore self-relying soul.
Thus all concentrates: let us not rove; let us sit at home with the cause.
Let us stun and astonish the intruding rabble of men and books and institutions, by a simple declaration of the divine fact.
Man does not stand in awe of man, nor is his genius admonished to stay at home to put itself in communication with the internal ocean, but it goes abroad to beg a cup of water of the urns of other men.
I like the silent church before the service begins, better than any preaching.
How far off, how cool, how chaste the persons look, begirt each one with a precinct or sanctuary!
Why should we assume the faults of our friend, or wife, or father, or child, because they sit around our hearth, or are said to have the same blood?
But your isolation must not be mechanical, but spiritual, that is, must be elevation.
At times the whole world seems to be in conspiracy to importune you with emphatic trifles.
Friend, client, child, sickness, fear, want, charity, all knock at once at thy closet door, and say, "Come out unto us." But keep thy state; come not into their confusion.
The power men possess to annoy men, I give them by a weak curiosity.
No man can come near me but through my act. "What we love that we have, but by desire we bereave ourselves of the love."
This is to be done in our smooth times by speaking the truth.
Check this lying hospitality and lying affection.
Live no longer to the expectation of these deceived and deceiving people with whom we converse.
Say to them, O father, O mother, O wife, O brother, O friend, I have lived with you after appearances hitherto.
Be it known unto you that henceforward I obey no law less than the eternal law.
If you cannot, I will still seek to deserve that you should.
I will so trust that what is deep is holy, that I will do strongly before the sun and moon whatever inly rejoices me, and the heart appoints.
If you are noble, I will love you; if you are not, I will not hurt you and myself by hypocritical attentions.
If you are true, but not in the same truth with me, cleave to your companions; I will seek my own.
I do this not selfishly, but humbly and truly.
It is alike your interest, and mine, and all men's however long we have dwelt in lies, to live in truth.
Yes, but I cannot sell my liberty and my power, to save their sensibility.
Besides, all persons have their moments of reason, when they look out into the region of absolute truth; then will they justify me, and do the same thing.
There are two confessionals, in one or the other of which we must be shriven.
Consider whether you have satisfied your relations to father, mother, cousin, neighbor, town, cat, and dog; whether any of these can upbraid you.
But I may also neglect this reflex standard, and absolve me to myself.
I have my own stern claims and perfect circle.
It denies the name of duty to many offices that are called duties.
But if I can discharge its debts, it enables me to dispense with the popular code.
If any one imagines that this law is lax, let him keep its commandment one day.
And truly it demands something godlike in him who has cast off the common motives of humanity, and has ventured to trust himself for a taskmaster.
High be his heart, faithful his will, clear his sight, that he may in good earnest be doctrine, society, law, to himself, that a simple purpose may be to him as strong as iron necessity is to others!
The sinew and heart of man seem to be drawn out, and we are become timorous, desponding whimperers.
We are afraid of truth, afraid of fortune, afraid of death, and afraid of each other.
Our age yields no great and perfect persons.
Our housekeeping is mendicant, our arts, our occupations, our marriages, our religion, we have not chosen, but society has chosen for us.
We shun the rugged battle of fate, where strength is born.
If our young men miscarry in their first enterprises, they lose all heart.
He walks abreast with his days, and feels no shame in not "studying a profession," for he does not postpone his life, but lives already.
He has not one chance, but a hundred chances.
It is easy to see that a greater self-reliance must work a revolution in all the offices and relations of men; in their religion; in their education; in their pursuits; their modes of living; their association; in their property; in their speculative views.
Prayer looks abroad and asks for some foreign addition to come through some foreign virtue, and loses itself in endless mazes of natural and supernatural, and mediatorial and miraculous.
Prayer that craves a particular commodity,--anything less than all good,--is vicious.
Prayer is the contemplation of the facts of life from the highest point of view.
But prayer as a means to effect a private end is meanness and theft.
It supposes dualism and not unity in nature and consciousness.
As soon as the man is at one with God, he will not beg.
The prayer of the farmer kneeling in his field to weed it, the prayer of the rower kneeling with the stroke of his oar, are true prayers heard throughout nature, though for cheap ends.
"His hidden meaning lies in our endeavors; Our valors are our best gods."
Another sort of false prayers are our regrets.
Discontent is the want of self-reliance; it is infirmity of will.
Regret calamities, if you can thereby help the sufferer; if not, attend your own work, and already the evil begins to be repaired.
We come to them who weep foolishly, and sit down and cry for company, instead of imparting to them truth and health in rough electric shocks, putting them once more in communication with their own reason.
The secret of fortune is joy in our hands.
Welcome evermore to gods and men is the self-helping man.
For him all doors are flung wide: him all tongues greet, all honors crown, all eyes follow with desire.
Our love goes out to him and embraces him, because he did not need it.
We solicitously and apologetically caress and celebrate him, because he held on his way and scorned our disapprobation.
As men's prayers are a disease of the will, so are their creeds a disease of the intellect.
They say with those foolish Israelites, "Let not God speak to us, lest we die.
In proportion to the depth of the thought, and so to the number of the objects it touches and brings within reach of the pupil, is his complacency.
But chiefly is this apparent in creeds and churches, which are also classifications of some powerful mind acting on the elemental thought of duty, and man's relation to the Highest.
It will happen for a time, that the pupil will find his intellectual power has grown by the study of his master's mind.
They cannot imagine how you aliens have any right to see,--how you can see; "It must be somehow that you stole the light from us." They do not yet perceive that light, unsystematic, indomitable, will break into any cabin, even into theirs.
Let them chirp awhile and call it their own.
It is for want of self-culture that the superstition of Traveling, whose idols are Italy, England, Egypt, retains its fascination for all educated Americans.
They who made England, Italy, or Greece venerable in the imagination did so by sticking fast where they were, like an axis of the earth.
In manly hours, we feel that duty is our place.
I have no churlish objection to the circumnavigation of the globe, for the purposes of art, of study, and benevolence, so that the man is first domesticated, or does not go abroad with the hope of finding somewhat greater than he knows.
Our first journeys discover to us the indifference of places.
At home I dream that at Naples, at Rome, I can be intoxicated with beauty, and lose my sadness.
I affect to be intoxicated with sights and suggestions, but I am not intoxicated.
But the rage of traveling is a symptom of a deeper unsoundness affecting the whole intellectual action.
The intellect is vagabond, and our system of education fosters restlessness.
Our minds travel when our bodies are forced to stay at home.
We imitate; and what is imitation but the traveling of the mind?
Our houses are built with foreign taste; our shelves are garnished with foreign ornaments; our opinions, our tastes, our faculties, lean, and follow the Past and the Distant.
The soul created the arts wherever they have flourished.
It was in his own mind that the artist sought his model.
It was an application of his own thought to the thing to be done and the conditions to be observed.
That which each can do best, none but his Maker can teach him.
No man yet knows what it is, nor can, till that person has exhibited it.
Shakespeare will never be made by the study of Shakespeare.
Do that which is assigned to you, and you cannot hope too much or dare too much.
As our Religion, our Education, our Art look abroad, so does our spirit of society.
All men plume themselves on the improvement of society, and no man improves.
It recedes as fast on one side as it gains on the other.
It undergoes continual changes; it is barbarous, it is civilized, it is Christianized, it is rich, it is scientific; but this change is not amelioration.
For everything that is given, something is taken.
Society acquires new arts, and loses old instincts.
But compare the health of the two men, and you shall see that the white man has lost his aboriginal strength.
If the traveler tell us truly, strike the savage with a broad ax, and in a day or two the flesh shall unite and heal as if you struck the blow into soft pitch, and the same blow shall send the white to his grave.
The civilized man has built a coach, but has lost the use of his feet.
He is supported on crutches, but lacks so much support of muscle.
For every Stoic was a Stoic; but in Christendom where is the Christian?
There is no more deviation in the moral standard than in the standard of height or bulk.
He who is really of their class will not be called by their name, but will be his own man, and, in his turn, the founder of a sect.
The arts and inventions of each period are only its costume, and do not invigorate men.
The harm of the improved machinery may compensate its good.
Galileo, with an opera-glass, discovered a more splendid series of celestial phenomena than any one since.
It is curious to see the periodical disuse and perishing of means and machinery, which were introduced with loud laudation a few years or centuries before.
The great genius returns to essential man.
The wave moves onward, but the water of which it is composed does not.
The same particle does not rise from the valley to the ridge.
The persons who make up a nation to-day, next year die, and their experience with them.
And so the reliance on Property, including the reliance on governments which protect it, is the want of self-reliance.
Men have looked away from themselves and at things so long, that they have come to esteem the religious, learned, and civil institutions as guards of property, and they deprecate assaults on these, because they feel them to be assaults on property.
They measure their esteem of each other by what each has, and not by what each is.
But a cultivated man becomes ashamed of his property, out of new respect for his nature.
The Whigs of Maine! the young patriot feels himself stronger than before by a new thousand of eyes and arms.
In like manner the reformers summon conventions, and vote and resolve in multitude.
Not so, O friends! will the god deign to enter and inhabit you, but by a method precisely the reverse.
It is only as a man puts off all foreign support, and stands alone, that I see him to be strong and to prevail.
He is weaker by every recruit to his banner.
Ask nothing of men, and in the endless mutation, thou only firm column must presently appear the upholder of all that surrounds thee.
But do thou leave as unlawful these winnings, and deal with Cause and Effect, the chancelors of God.
In the Will work and acquire, and thou hast chained the wheel of Chance, and shalt sit hereafter out of fear from her rotations.
A political victory, a rise of rents, the recovery of your sick, or the return of your absent friend, or some other favorable event, raises your spirits, and you think good days are preparing for you.
Nothing can bring you peace but yourself.
Nothing can bring you peace but the triumph of principles.
We have a great deal more kindness than is ever spoken.
Barring all the selfishness that chills like east winds the world, the whole human family is bathed with an element of love like a fine ether.
How many persons we meet in houses, whom we scarcely speak to, whom yet we honor, and who honor us!
How many we see in the street, or sit with in church, whom, though silently, we warmly rejoice to be with!
Read the language of these wandering eyebeams.
The effect of the indulgence of this human affection is a certain cordial exhilaration.
In poetry, and in common speech, the emotions of benevolence and complacency which are felt toward others, are likened to the material effects of fire; so swift, or much more swift, more active, more cheering are these fine inward irradiations.
From the highest degree of passionate love, to the lowest degree of good will, they make the sweetness of life.
Our intellectual and active powers increase with our affection.
See in any house where virtue and self-respect abide, the palpitation which the approach of a stranger causes.
A commended stranger is expected and announced, and an uneasiness between pleasure and pain invades all the hearts of a household.
His arrival almost brings fear to the good hearts that would welcome him.
The house is dusted, all things fly into their places, the old coat is exchanged for the new, and they must get up a dinner if they can.
Of a commended stranger, only the good report is told by others, only the good and new is heard by us.
Having imagined and invested him, we ask how we should stand related in conversation and action with such a man, and are uneasy with fear.
The same idea exalts conversation with him.
We have the nimblest fancy, a richer memory, and our dumb devil has taken leave for the time.
For long hours we can continue a series of sincere, graceful, rich communications, drawn from the oldest, secretest experience, so that they who sit by, of our own kinsfolk and acquaintance, shall feel a lively surprise at our unusual powers.
But as soon as the stranger begins to intrude his partialities, his definitions, his defects, into the conversation, it is all over.
He has heard the first, the last and best, he will ever hear from us.
Vulgarity, ignorance, misapprehension, are old acquaintances.
Now, when he comes, he may get the order, the dress, and the dinner, but the throbbing of the heart, and the communications of the soul, no more.
What is so delicious as a just and firm encounter of two, in a thought, in a feeling?
How beautiful, on their approach to this beating heart, the steps and forms of the gifted and the true!
The moment we indulge our affections, the earth is metamorphosed; there is no winter, and no night; all tragedies, all ennuis vanish; all duties even; nothing fills the proceeding eternity but the forms all radiant of beloved persons.
Let the soul be assured that somewhere in the universe it should rejoin its friend, and it would be content and cheerful alone for a thousand years.
I awoke this morning with devout thanksgiving for my friends, the old and the new.
Shall I not call God, the Beautiful, who daily showeth himself so to me in his gifts?
High thanks I owe you, excellent lovers, who carry out the world for me to new and noble depths, and enlarge the meaning of all my thoughts.
Will these two separate themselves from me again, or some of them?
I confess to an extreme tenderness of nature on this point.
A new person is to me a great event, and hinders me from sleep.
I have had such fine fancies lately about two or three persons, as have given me delicious hours, but the joy ends in the day: it yields no fruit.
Thought is not born of it; my action is very little modified.
I must feel pride in my friend's accomplishments as if they were mine, and a property in his virtues.
I feel as warmly when he is praised, as the lover when he hears applause of his engaged maiden.
We over-estimate the conscience of our friend.
His goodness seems better than our goodness, his nature finer, his temptations less.
Everything that is his,--his name, his form, his dress, books and instruments,--fancy enhances.
Our own thought sounds new and larger from his mouth.
The lover, beholding his maiden, half knows that she is not verily that which he worships; and in the golden hour of friendship, we are surprised with shades of suspicion and unbelief.
We doubt that we bestow on our hero the virtues in which he shines, and afterward worship the form to which we have ascribed this divine inhabitation.
In strictness, the soul does not respect men as it respects itself.
In strict science, all persons underlie the same condition of an infinite remoteness.
If I am, I shall not fear to know them for what they are.
Their essence is not less beautiful than their appearance, though it needs finer organs for its apprehension.
The root of the plant is not unsightly to science, though for chaplets and festoons we cut the stem short.
No advantages, no powers, no gold or force can be any match for him.
I cannot choose but rely on my own poverty, more than on your wealth.
I cannot make your consciousness tantamount to mine.
Only the star dazzles; the planet has a faint, moon-like ray.
I hear what you say of the admirable parts and tried temper of the party you praise, but I see well that for all his purple cloaks I shall not like him, unless he is at least a poor Greek like me.
I cannot deny it, O friend, that the vast shadow of the Phenomenal includes thee, also, in its pied and painted immensity,--thee, also, compared with whom all else is shadow.
Thou art not Being, as Truth is, as Justice is,--thou art not my soul, but a picture and effigy of that.
Thou hast come to me lately, and already thou art seizing thy hat and cloak.
Each electrical state superinduces the opposite.
The soul environs itself with friends, that it may enter into a grander self-acquaintance or solitude; and it goes alone, for a season, that it may exalt its conversation or society.
This method betrays itself along the whole history of our personal relations.
The instinct of affection revives the hope of union with our mates, and the returning sense of insulation recalls us from the chase.
Thus every man passes his life in the search after friendship, and if he should record his true sentiment, he might write a letter like this, to each new candidate for his love:--
If I was sure of thee, sure of thy capacity, sure to match my mood with thine, I should never think again of trifles, in relation to thy comings and goings.
I am not very wise; my moods are quite attainable; and I respect thy genius; it is to me as yet unfathomed; yet dare I not presume in thee a perfect intelligence of me, and so thou art to me a delicious torment.
Yet these uneasy pleasures and fine pains are for curiosity, and not for life.
The laws of friendship are great, austere, and eternal, of one web with the laws of nature and of morals.
But we have aimed at a swift and petty benefit, to suck a sudden sweetness.
We snatch at the slowest fruit in the whole garden of God, which many summers and many winters must ripen.
We seek our friend not sacredly but with an adulterate passion which would appropriate him to ourselves.
We are armed all over with subtle antagonisms, which, as soon as we meet, begin to play, and translate all poetry into stale prose.
All association must be a compromise, and, what is worst, the very flower and aroma of the flower of each of the beautiful natures disappears as they approach each other.
What a perpetual disappointment is actual society, even of the virtuous and gifted!
After interviews have been compassed with long foresight, we must be tormented presently by baffled blows, by sudden, unseasonable apathies, by epilepsies of wit and of animal spirits, in the heyday of friendship and thought.
Our faculties do not play us true, and both parties are relieved by solitude.
It makes no difference how many friends I have, and what content I can find in conversing with each, if there be one to whom I am not equal.
If I have shrunk unequal from one contest instantly, the joy I find in all the rest becomes mean and cowardly.
I should hate myself, if then I made my other friends my asylum.
Bashfulness and apathy are a tough husk in which a delicate organization is protected from premature ripening.
It would be lost if it knew itself before any of the best souls were yet ripe enough to know and own it.
The good spirit of our life has no heaven which is the price of rashness.
Love, which is the essence of God, is not for levity, but for the total worth of man.
Let us not have this childish luxury in our regards, but the austerest worth; let us approach our friend with an audacious trust in the truth of his heart, in the breadth, impossible to be overturned, of his foundations.
I do not wish to treat friendships daintily, but with roughest courage.
When they are real, they are not glass threads or frost-work, but the solidest thing we know.
For now, after so many ages of experience, what do we know of nature, or of ourselves?
Not one step has man taken toward the solution of the problem of his destiny.
In one condemnation of folly stand the whole universe of men.
But the sweet sincerity of joy and peace, which I draw from this alliance with my brother's soul, is the nut itself whereof all nature and all thought is but the husk and shell.
Happy is the house that shelters a friend!
It might well be built, like a festal bower or arch, to entertain him a single day.
Happier, if he know the solemnity of that relation, and honor its law!
He proposes himself for contest where Time, Want, Danger are in the lists, and he alone is victor who has truth enough in his constitution to preserve the delicacy of his beauty from the wear and tear of all these.
The gifts of fortune may be present or absent, but all the hap in that contest depends on intrinsic nobleness, and the contempt of trifles.
There are two elements that go to the composition of friendship, each so sovereign, that I can detect no superiority in either, no reason why either should be first named.
A friend is a person with whom I may be sincere.
At the entrance of a second person, hypocrisy begins.
We parry and fend the approach of our fellow-man by compliments, by gossip, by amusements, by affairs.
We cover up our thought from him under a hundred folds.
At first he was resisted, and all men agreed he was mad.
But persisting, as indeed he could not help doing, for some time in this course, he attained to the advantage of bringing every man of his acquaintance into true relations with him.
No man would think of speaking falsely with him, or of putting him off with any chat of markets or reading-rooms.
But every man was constrained by so much sincerity to the like plain dealing and what love of nature, what poetry, what symbol of truth he had, he did certainly show him.
But to most of us society shows not its face and eye, but its side and its back.
To stand in true relations with men in a false age, is worth a fit of insanity, is it not?
Almost every man we meet requires some civility,--requires to be humored; he has some fame, some talent, some whim of religion or philanthropy in his head that is not to be questioned, and which spoils all conversation with him.
But a friend is a sane man who exercises not my ingenuity, but me.
My friend gives me entertainment without requiring any stipulation on my part.
The other element of friendship is tenderness.
Can another be so blessed, and we so pure, that we can offer him tenderness?
When a man becomes dear to me, I have touched the goal of fortune.
I find very little written directly to the heart of this matter in books.
And yet I have one text which I cannot choose but remember.
It must plant itself on the ground, before it vaults over the moon.
It is an exchange of gifts, of useful loans; it is good neighborhood; it watches with the sick; it holds the pall at the funeral; and quite loses sight of the delicacies and nobility of the relation.
But though we cannot find the god under this disguise of a sutler, yet, on the other hand, we cannot forgive the poet if he spins his thread too fine, and does not substantiate his romance by the municipal virtues of justice, punctuality, fidelity and pity.
I hate the prostitution of the name of friendship to signify modish and worldly alliances.
The end of friendship is a commerce the most strict and homely that can be joined; more strict than any of which we have experience.
It is for aid and comfort through all the relations and passages of life and death.
It is fit for serene days, and graceful gifts, and country rambles, but also for rough roads and hard fare, shipwreck, poverty, and persecution.
It keeps company with the sallies of the wit and the trances of religion.
We are to dignify to each other the daily needs and offices of man's life, and embellish it by courage, wisdom and unity.
It should never fall into something usual and settled, but should be alert and inventive, and add rhyme and reason to what was drudgery.
It cannot subsist in its perfection, say some of those who are learned in this warm lore of the heart, betwixt more than two.
I am not quite so strict in my terms, perhaps because I have never known so high a fellowship as others.
I please my imagination more with a circle of godlike men and women variously related to each other, and between whom subsists a lofty intelligence.
You shall have very useful and cheering discourse at several times with two several men, but let all three of you come together, and you shall not have one new and hearty word.
Two may talk and one may hear, but three cannot take part in a conversation of the most sincere and searching sort.
In good company there is never such discourse between two, across the table, as takes place when you leave them alone.
In good company, the individuals at once merge their egotism into a social soul exactly co-extensive with the several consciousnesses there present.
No partialities of friend to friend, no fondnesses of brother to sister, of wife to husband, are there pertinent, but quite otherwise.
Only he may then speak who can sail on the common thought of the party, and not poorly limited to his own.
Now this convention, which good sense demands, destroys the high freedom of great conversation, which requires an absolute running of two souls into one.
No two men but being left alone with each other, enter into simpler relations.
Unrelated men give little joy to each other; will never suspect the latent powers of each.
We talk sometimes of a great talent for conversation, as if it were a permanent property in some individuals.
Conversation is an evanescent relation,--no more.
A man is reputed to have thought and eloquence; he cannot, for all that, say a word to his cousin or his uncle.
They accuse his silence with as much reason as they would blame the insignificance of a dial in the shade.
Among those who enjoy his thought, he will regain his tongue.
Friendship requires that rare mean betwixt likeness and unlikeness, that piques each with the presence of power and of consent in the other party.
Let me be alone to the end of the world, rather than that my friend should overstep by a word or a look his real sympathy.
I am equally balked by antagonism and by compliance.
Let him not cease an instant to be himself.
I hate, where I looked for a manly furtherance, or at least a manly resistance, to find a mush of concession.
Better be a nettle in the side of your friend, than his echo.
The condition which high friendship demands is ability to do without it.
That high office requires great and sublime parts.
There must be very two before there can be very one.
Let it be an alliance of two large formidable natures, mutually beheld, mutually feared, before yet they recognize the deep identity which beneath these disparities unites them.
He only is fit for this society who is magnanimous; who is sure that greatness and goodness are always economy; who is not swift to intermeddle with his fortunes.
Leave to the diamond its ages to grow, nor expect to accelerate the births of the eternal.
Friendship demands a religious treatment.
We talk of choosing our friends, but friends are self-elected.
Of course he has merits that are not yours, and that you cannot honor, if you must needs hold him close to your person.
Stand aside; give those merits room; let them mount and expand.
Are you the friend of your friend's buttons, or of his thought?
To a great heart he will still be a stranger in a thousand particulars, that he may come near in the holiest ground.
Leave it to girls and boys to regard a friend as property, and to suck a short and all-confounding pleasure instead of the noblest benefits.
Let us buy our entrance to this guild by a long probation.
Why should we desecrate noble and beautiful souls by intruding on them?
Why insist on rash personal relations with your friend?
Why go to his house, or know his mother and brother and sisters?
Are these things material to our covenant?
A message, a thought, a sincerity, a glance from him I want, but not news, nor pottage.
I can get politics, and chat, and neighborly conveniences, from cheaper companions.
Should not the society of my friend be to me poetic, pure, universal, and great as nature itself?
Ought I to feel that our tie is profane in comparison with yonder bar of cloud that sleeps on the horizon, or that clump of waving grass that divides the brook?
Let us not vilify but raise it to that standard.
That great defying eye, that scornful beauty of his mien and action, do not pique yourself on reducing, but rather fortify and enhance.
Worship his superiorities; wish him not less by a thought, but hoard and tell them all.
Let him be to thee forever a sort of beautiful enemy, untamable, devoutly revered, and not a trivial conveniency to be soon outgrown and cast aside.
The hues of the opal, the light of the diamond, are not to be seen, if the eye is too near.
To my friend I write a letter, and from him I receive a letter.
It is a spiritual gift worthy of him to give and of me to receive.
In these warm lines the heart will trust itself, as it will not to the tongue, and pour out the prophecy of a godlier existence than all the annals of heroism have yet made good.
Respect so far the holy laws of this fellowship as not to prejudice its perfect flower by your impatience for its opening.
We must be our own before we can be another's.
To those whom we admire and love, at first we cannot.
Yet the least defect of self-possession vitiates, in my judgment, the entire relation.
There can never be deep peace between two spirits, never mutual respect until, in their dialogue, each stands for the whole world.
What is so great as friendship, let us carry with what grandeur of spirit we can.
Let us be silent,--so we may hear the whisper of the gods.
Who set you to cast about what you should say to the select souls, or how to say anything to such?
No matter how ingenious, no matter how graceful and bland.
There are innumerable degrees of folly and wisdom, and for you to say aught is to be frivolous.
Wait until the necessary and everlasting overpowers you, until day and night avail themselves of your lips.
The only reward of virtue, is virtue; the only way to have a friend is to be one.
You shall not come nearer a man by getting into his house.
If unlike, his soul only flees the faster from you, and you shall catch never a true glance of his eye.
We see the noble afar off, and they repel us; why should we intrude?
In the last analysis, love is only the reflection of a man's own worthiness from other men.
Men have sometimes exchanged names with their friends, as if they would signify that in their friend each loved his own soul.
The higher the style we demand of friendship, of course the less easy to establish it with flesh and blood.
Friends, such as we desire, are dreams and fables.
But a sublime hope cheers ever the faithful heart, that elsewhere, in other regions of the universal power, souls are now acting, enduring and daring, which can love us, and which we can love.
Only be admonished by what you already see, not to strike leagues of friendship with cheap persons, where no friendship can be.
Our impatience betrays us into rash and foolish alliances which no God attends.
By persisting in your path, though you forfeit the little you gain the great.
It is foolish to be afraid of making our ties too spiritual, as if so we could lose any genuine love.
Whatever correction of our popular views we make from insight, nature will be sure to bear us out in, and though it seem to rob us of some joy, will repay us with a greater.
Let us feel, if we will, the absolute insulation of man.
We go to Europe, or we pursue persons, or we read books, in the instinctive faith that these will call it out and reveal us to ourselves.
The persons are such as we; the Europe, an old faded garment of dead persons; the books, their ghosts.
Let us even bid our dearest friends farewell, and defy them, saying, "Who are you?
I will be dependent no more." Ah! seest thou not, O brother, that thus we part only to meet again on a higher platform, and only be more each other's, because we are more our own?
I do then with my friends as I do with my books.
I would have them where I can find them, but I seldom use them.
We must have society on our own terms, and admit or exclude it on the slightest cause.
I cannot afford to speak much with my friend.
If he is great, he makes me so great that I cannot descend to converse.
In the great days, presentiments hover before me, far before me in the firmament.
I ought then to dedicate myself to them.
I go in that I may seize them, I go out that I may seize them.
I fear only that I may lose them receding into the sky in which now they are only a patch of brighter light.
Then, though I prize my friends, I cannot afford to talk with them and study their visions, lest I lose my own.
It would indeed give me a certain household joy to quit this lofty seeking, this spiritual astronomy, or search of stars, and come down to warm sympathies with you; but then I know well I shall mourn always the vanishing of my mighty gods.
It is true, next week I shall have languid moods, when I can well afford to occupy myself with foreign objects; then I shall regret the lost literature of your mind, and wish you were by my side again.
But if you come, perhaps you will fill my mind only with new visions, not with yourself but with your lusters, and I shall not be able any more than now to converse with you.
So I will owe to my friends this evanescent intercourse.
I will receive from them, not what they have, but what they are.
They shall give me that which properly they cannot give, but which emanates from them.
But they shall not hold me by any relations less subtile and pure.
We will meet as though we met not, and part as though we parted not.
It has seemed to me lately more possible than I knew, to carry a friendship greatly, on one side, without due correspondence on the other.
Why should I cumber myself with regrets that the receiver is not capacious?
It never troubles the sun that some of his rays fall wide and vain into ungrateful space, and only a small part on the reflecting planet.
Let your greatness educate the crude and cold companion.
But the great will see that true love cannot be unrequited.
True love transcends the unworthy object, and dwells and broods on the eternal, and when the poor interposed mask crumbles, it is not sad, but feels rid of so much earth, and feels its independency the surer.
Yet these things may hardly be said without a sort of treachery to the relation.
The essence of friendship is entireness, a total magnanimity and trust.
It must not surmise or provide for infirmity.
It treats its object as a god, that it may deify both.
The Roman Martius has conquered Athens--all but the invincible spirits of Sophocles, the duke of Athens, and Dorigen, his wife.
The beauty of the latter inflames Martius, and he seeks to save her husband; but Sophocles will not ask his life, although assured, that a word will save him, and the execution of both proceeds.
So, 'tis well; Never one object underneath the sun Will I behold before my Sophocles: Farewell; now teach the Romans how to die.
It is to end An old, stale, weary work, and to commence A newer and a better. 'Tis to leave Deceitful knaves for the society Of gods and goodness.
Thou, thyself, must part At last, from all thy garlands, pleasures, triumphs, And prove thy fortitude what then 'twill do.
Now, I'll kneel, But with my back toward thee; 'tis the last duty This trunk can do the gods.
Kiss thy lord, And live with all the freedom you were wont.
O love! thou doubly hast afflicted me With virtue and with beauty.
Treacherous heart, My hand shall cast thee quick into my urn, Ere thou transgress this knot of piety.
I do not readily remember any poem, play, sermon, novel, or oration, that our press vents in the last few years, which goes to the same tune.
We have a great many flutes and flageolets, but not often the sound of any fife.
Each of his "Lives" is a refutation to the despondency and cowardice of our religious and political theorists.
We need books of this tart cathartic virtue, more than books of political science, or of private economy.
Seen from the nook and chimney-side of prudence, it wears a ragged and dangerous front.
The violations of the laws of nature by our predecessors and our contemporaries are punished in us also.
The disease and deformity around us certify the infraction of natural, intellectual, and moral laws, and often violation on violation to breed such compound misery.
Unhappily, almost no man exists who has not in his own person become, to some amount, a stockholder in the sin, and so made himself liable to a share in the expiation.
Our culture, therefore, must not omit the arming of the man.
Toward all this external evil, the man within the breast assumes a warlike attitude, and affirms his ability to cope single-handed with the infinite army of enemies.
To this military attitude of the soul we give the name of Heroism.
Its rudest form is the contempt for safety and ease, which makes the attractiveness of war.
It is a self-trust which slights the restraints of prudence, in the plenitude of its energy and power to repair the harms it may suffer.
The hero is a mind of such balance that no disturbances can shake his will, but pleasantly, and, as it were, merrily, he advances to his own music, alike in frightful alarms, and in the tipsy mirth of universal dissoluteness.
There is somewhat not philosophical in heroism; there is somewhat not holy in it; it seems not to know that other souls are of one texture with it; it has pride; it is the extreme of individual nature.
Nevertheless, we must profoundly revere it.
There is somewhat in great actions, which does not allow us to go behind them.
It is the avowal of the unschooled man, that he finds a quality in him that is negligent of expense, of health, of life, of danger, of hatred, of reproach, and knows that his will is higher and more excellent than all actual and all possible antagonists.
Heroism works in contradiction to the voice of mankind, and in contradiction, for a time, to the voice of the great and good.
Now to no other man can its wisdom appear as it does to him, for every man must be supposed to see a little further on his own proper path than any one else.
Therefore, just and wise men take umbrage at his act, until after some little time be past: then they see it to be in unison with their acts.
All prudent men see that the action is clean contrary to a sensual prosperity; for every heroic act measures itself by its contempt of some external good.
But it finds its own success at last, and then the prudent also extol.
It is the state of the soul at war, and its ultimate objects are the last defiance of falsehood and wrong, and the power to bear all that can be inflicted by evil agents.
It speaks the truth, and it is just, generous, hospitable, temperate, scornful of petty calculations, and scornful of being scorned.
It persists; it is of an undaunted boldness, and of a fortitude not to be wearied out.
Its jest is the littleness of common life.
That false prudence which dotes on health and wealth is the butt and merriment of heroism.
What shall it say, then, to the sugar-plums, and cats'-cradles, to the toilet, compliments, quarrels, cards, and custard, which rack the wit of all human society.
What joys has kind nature provided for us dear creatures!
There seems to be no interval between greatness and meanness.
When the spirit is not master of the world then it is its dupe.
What a disgrace is it to me to take note how many pairs of silk stockings thou hast, namely, these and those that were the peach-colored ones; or to bear the inventory of thy shirts, as one for superfluity, and one other for use!"
I asked the reason, and was told that the house had not been shut, night or day, for a hundred years.
Strangers may present themselves at any hour, and in whatever number; the master has amply provided for the reception of the men and their animals, and is never happier than when they tarry for some time.
In some way the time they seem to lose is redeemed, and the pains they seem to take remunerate themselves.
These men fan the flame of human love, and raise the standard of civil virtue among mankind.
But hospitality must be for service, and not for show, or it pulls down the host.
The brave soul rates itself too high to value itself by the splendor of its table and draperies.
The temperance of the hero proceeds from the same wish to do no dishonor to the worthiness he has.
But he loves it for its elegancy, not for its austerity.
It seems not worth his while to be solemn, and denounce with bitterness flesh-eating or wine-drinking, the use of tobacco, or opium, or tea, or silk, or gold.
A great man scarcely knows how he dines, how he dresses; but without railing or precision, his living is natural and poetic.
I have followed thee through life, and I find thee at last but a shade." I doubt not the hero is slandered by this report.
The heroic soul does not sell its justice and its nobleness.
It does not ask to dine nicely, and to sleep warm.
The essence of greatness is the perception that virtue is enough.
It does not need plenty, and can very well abide its loss.
But that which takes my fancy most, in the heroic class, is the good humor and hilarity they exhibit.
It is a height to which common duty can very well attain, to suffer and to dare with solemnity.
But these rare souls set opinion, success, and life, at so cheap a rate, that they will not soothe their enemies by petitions, or the show of sorrow, but wear their own habitual greatness.
In Beaumont and Fletcher's "Sea Voyage," Juletta tells the stout captain and his company,
Sport is the bloom and glow of a perfect health.
The great will not condescend to take anything seriously; all must be as gay as the song of a canary, though it were the building of cities, or the eradication of old and foolish churches and nations, which have cumbered the earth long thousands of years.
The interest these fine stories have for us, the power of a romance over the boy who grasps the forbidden book under his bench at school, our delight in the hero, is the main fact to our purpose.
All these great and transcendent properties are ours.
If we dilate in beholding the Greek energy, the Roman pride, it is that we are already domesticating the same sentiment.
Let us find room for this great guest in our small houses.
The first step of worthiness will be to disabuse us of our superstitious associations with places and times, with number and size.
Why should these words, Athenian, Roman, Asia, and England, so tingle in the ear?
Where the heart is, there the muses, there the gods sojourn, and not in any geography of fame.
Massachusetts, Connecticut River, and Boston Bay, you think paltry places, and the ear loves names of foreign and classic topography.
But here we are; and, if we will tarry a little, we may come to learn that here is best.
See to it only that thyself is here;--and art and nature, hope and fate, friends, angels, and the Supreme Being, shall not be absent from the chamber where thou sittest.
That country is the fairest, which is inhabited by the noblest minds.
We have seen or heard of many extraordinary young men, who never ripened, or whose performance in actual life was not extraordinary.
When we see their air and mien, when we hear them speak of society, or books, or religion, we admire their superiority; they seem to throw contempt on our entire polity and social state; theirs is the tone of a youthful giant, who is sent to work revolutions.
The magic they used was the ideal tendencies, which always make the Actual ridiculous; but the tough world had its revenge the moment they put their horses of the sun to plow in its furrow.
They found no example and no companion, and their heart fainted.
The lesson they gave in their first aspirations, is yet true; and a better valor and a purer truth shall one day organize their belief.
She has a new and unattempted problem to solve, perchance that of the happiest nature that ever bloomed.
The fair girl, who repels interference by a decided and proud choice of influences, so careless of pleasing, so wilful and lofty, inspires every beholder with somewhat of her own nobleness.
The silent heart encourages her; O friend, never strike sail to a fear!
Come into port greatly, or sail with God the seas.
Not in vain you live, for every passing eye is cheered and refined by the vision.
The characteristic of a genuine heroism is its persistency.
All men have wandering impulses, fits and starts of generosity.
But when you have chosen your part, abide by it, and do not weakly try to reconcile yourself with the world.
The heroic cannot be the common, nor the common the heroic.
Yet we have the weakness to expect the sympathy of people in those actions whose excellence is that they outrun sympathy, and appeal to a tardy justice.
If you would serve your brother, because it is fit for you to serve him, do not take back your words when you find that prudent people do not commend you.
Adhere to your own act, and congratulate yourself if you have done something strange and extravagant, and broken the monotony of a decorous age.
There is no weakness or exposure for which we cannot find consolation in the thought,--this is a part of my constitution, part of my relation and office to my fellow-creature.
Has nature covenanted with me that I should never appear to disadvantage, never make a ridiculous figure?
Let us be generous of our dignity as well as of our money.
Greatness once and forever has done with opinion.
We tell our charities, not because we wish to be praised for them, not because we think they have great merit, but for our justification.
It is a capital blunder; as you discover, when another man recites his charities.
Times of heroism are generally times of terror, but the day never shines in which this element may not work.
The circumstances of man, we say, are historically somewhat better in this country, and at this hour, than perhaps ever before.
It will not now run against an ax at the first step out of the beaten track of opinion.
But whoso is heroic will always find crises to try his edge.
Human virtue demands her champions and martyrs, and the trial of persecution always proceeds.
I see not any road to perfect peace which a man can walk, but to take counsel of his own bosom.
Let him quit too much association, let him go home much, and establish himself in those courses he approves.
The unremitting retention of simple and high sentiments in obscure duties is hardening the character to that temper which will work with honor, if need be, in the tumult, or on the scaffold.
Whatever outrages have happened to men may befall a man again; and very easily in a republic, if there appear any signs of a decay of religion.
It may calm the apprehension of calamity in the most susceptible heart to see how quick a bound nature has set to the utmost infliction of malice.
We rapidly approach a brink over which no enemy can follow us.
In the gloom of our ignorance of what shall be, in the hour when we are deaf to the higher voices, who does not envy them who have seen safely to an end their manful endeavor?
Who that sees the meanness of our politics, but inly congratulates Washington that he is long already wrapped in his shroud, and forever safe; that he was laid sweet in his grave, the hope of humanity not yet subjugated in him?
Who does not sometimes envy the good and brave, who are no more to suffer from the tumults of the natural world, and await with curious complacency the speedy term of his own conversation with finite nature?
And yet the love that will be annihilated sooner than treacherous has already made death impossible, and affirms itself no mortal, but a native of the deeps of absolute and inextinguishable being.
Half the world, it is said, knows not how the other half live.
To set up their housekeeping, nothing is requisite but two or three earthen pots, a stone to grind meal, and a mat which is the bed.
The house, namely, a tomb, is ready without rent or taxes.
No rain can pass through the roof, and there is no door, for there is no want of one, as there is nothing to lose.
What fact more conspicuous in modern history, than the creation of the gentleman?
Frivolous and fantastic additions have got associated with the name, but the steady interest of mankind in it must be attributed to the valuable properties which it designates.
It is made of the spirit, more than of the talent of men, and is a compound result, into which every great force enters as an ingredient, namely, virtue, wit, beauty, wealth, and power.
There is something equivocal in all the words in use to express the excellence of manners and social cultivation, because the qualities are fluxional, and the last effect is assumed by the senses as the cause.
The usual words, however, must be respected: they will be found to contain the root of the matter.
The point of distinction in all this class of names, as courtesy, chivalry, fashion, and the like, is, that the flower and fruit, not the grain of the tree, are contemplated.
It is beauty which is the aim this time, and not worth.
The result is now in question, although our words intimate well enough the popular feeling, that the appearance supposes a substance.
The gentleman is a man of truth, lord of his own actions, and expressing that lordship in his behavior, not in any manner dependent and servile either on persons, or opinions, or possessions.
Beyond this fact of truth and real force, the word denotes good-nature and benevolence: manhood first, and then gentleness.
The popular notion certainly adds a condition of ease and fortune; but that is a natural result of personal force and love, that they should possess and dispense the goods of the world.
But personal force never goes out of fashion.
That is still paramount to-day, and, in the moving crowd of good society, the men of valor and reality are known, and rise to their natural place.
The competition is transferred from war to politics and trade, but the personal force appears readily enough in these new arenas.
In politics and in trade, bruisers and pirates are of better promise than talkers and clerks.
It describes a man standing in his own right, and working after untaught methods.
The society of the energetic class, in their friendly and festive meetings, is full of courage, and of attempts, which intimidate the pale scholar.
The intellect relies on memory to make some supplies to face these extemporaneous squadrons.
But memory is a base mendicant with basket and badge, in the presence of these sudden masters.
My gentleman gives the law where he is; he will outpray saints in chapel, outgeneral veterans in the field, and outshine all courtesy in the hall.
He is good company for pirates, and good with academicians; so that it is useless to fortify yourself against him; he has the private entrance to all minds, and I could as easily exclude myself as him.
They sat very carelessly in their chairs, and were too excellent themselves to value any condition at a high rate.
A plentiful fortune is reckoned necessary, in the popular judgment, to the completion of this man of the world: and it is a material deputy which walks through the dance which the first has led.
Money is not essential, but this wide affinity is, which transcends the habits of clique and caste, and makes itself felt by men of all classes.
The manners of this class are observed and caught with devotion by men of taste.
The association of these masters with each other, and with men intelligent of their merits, is mutually agreeable and stimulating.
The good forms, the happiest expressions of each, are repeated and adopted.
By swift consent, everything superfluous is dropped, everything graceful is renewed.
Manners aim to facilitate life, to get rid of impediments, and bring the man pure to energize.
They aid our dealing and conversation, as a railway aids traveling, by getting rid of all avoidable obstructions of the road, and leaving nothing to be conquered but pure space.
These forms very soon become fixed, and a fine sense of propriety is cultivated with more heed, that it becomes a badge of social and civil distinctions.
Thus grows up Fashion, an equivocal semblance, the most puissant, the most fantastic and frivolous, the most feared and followed, and which morals and violence assault in vain.
There exists a strict relation between the class of power, and the exclusive and polished circles.
The last are always filled or filling from the first.
The strong men usually give some allowance even to the petulances of fashion, for that affinity they find in it.
Fashion, though in a strange way, represents all manly virtue.
It is a virtue gone to seed: it is a kind of posthumous honor.
It does not often caress the great, but the children of the great: it is a hall of the Past.
It usually sets its face against the great of this hour.
Great men are not commonly in its halls: they are absent in the field: they are working, not triumphing.
In the year 1805, it is said, every legitimate monarch in Europe was imbecile.
The city would have died out, rotted, and exploded, long ago, but that it was reinforced from the fields.
It is only country which came to town day before yesterday, that is city and court to-day.
Aristocracy and fashion are certain inevitable results.
These mutual selections are indestructible.
It respects the administration of such unimportant matters, that we should not look for any durability in its rule.
We sometimes meet men under some strong moral influence, as a patriotic, a literary, a religious movement, and feel that the moral sentiment rules man and nature.
Not in Egypt or in India a firmer or more impassable line.
Each returns to his degree in the scale of good society, porcelain remains porcelain, and earthen earthen.
The objects of fashion may be frivolous, or fashion may be objectless, but the nature of this union and selection can be neither frivolous nor accidental.
Each man's rank in that perfect graduation depends on some symmetry in his structure, or some agreement in his structure to the symmetry of society.
Its doors unbar instantaneously to a natural claim of their own kind.
A natural gentleman finds his way in, and will keep the oldest patrician out, who has lost his intrinsic rank.
Fashion understands itself; good-breeding and personal superiority of whatever country readily fraternize with those of every other.
We contemn, in turn, every other gift of men of the world; but the habit, even in little and the least matters, of not appealing to any but our own sense of propriety, constitutes the foundation of all chivalry.
There is almost no kind of self-reliance, so it be sane and proportioned, which fashion does not occasionally adopt, and give it the freedom of its saloons.
A sainted soul is always elegant, and, if it will, passes unchallenged into the most guarded ring.
But so will Jock the teamster pass, in some crisis that brings him thither, and find favor, as long as his head is not giddy with the new circumstance, and the iron shoes do not wish to dance in waltzes and cotillions.
For there is nothing settled in manners, but the laws of behavior yield to the energy of the individual.
The maiden at her first ball, the countryman at a city dinner, believes that there is a ritual according to which every act and compliment must be performed, or the failing party must be cast out of this presence.
All that fashion demands is composure, and self-content.
A circle of men perfectly well-bred would be a company of sensible persons, in which every man's native manners and character appear.
If the fashionist have not this quality, he is nothing.
We are such lovers of self-reliance, that we excuse in man many sins, if he will show us a complete satisfaction in his position, which asks no leave to be of mine, or any man's good opinion.
But any deference to some eminent man or woman of the world, forfeits all privilege of nobility.
He is an underling: I have nothing to do with him; I will speak with his master.
A man should not go where he cannot carry his whole sphere or society with him,--not bodily, the whole circle of his friends, but atmospherically.
These are the chamberlains of the lesser gods.
Accept their coldness as an omen of grace with the loftier deities, and allow them all their privilege.
They are clear in their office, nor could they be thus formidable, without their own merits.
But do not measure the importance of this class by their pretension, or imagine that a fop can be the dispenser of honor and shame.
As the first thing man requires of man is reality, so that appears in all the forms of society.
We pointedly, and by name, introduce the parties to each other.
Know you before all heaven and earth, that this is Andrew, and this is Gregory;--they look each other in the eye; they grasp each other's hand, to identify and signalize each other.
A gentleman never dodges; his eyes look straight forward, and he assures the other party, first of all, that he has been met.
For what is it that we seek, in so many visits and hospitalities?
Is it your draperies, pictures, and decorations?
I may go into a cottage, and find a farmer who feels that he is the man I have come to see, and fronts me accordingly.
It was therefore a very natural point of old feudal etiquette, that a gentleman who received a visit, though it were of his sovereign, should not leave his roof, but should wait his arrival at the door of his house.
And yet we are not often gratified by this hospitality.
Everybody we know surrounds himself with a fine house, fine books, conservatory, gardens, equipage, and all manner of toys, as screens to interpose between himself and his guests.
Does it not seem as if man was of a very sly, elusive nature, and dreaded nothing so much as a full renconter front to front with his fellow?
It were unmerciful, I know, quite to abolish the use of these screens, which are of eminent convenience, whether the guest is too great, or too little.
We call together many friends who keep each other in play, or by luxuries and ornaments we amuse the young people, and guard our retirement.
But emperors and rich men are by no means the most skillful masters of good manners.
No rent roll nor army-list can dignify skulking and dissimulations: and the first point of courtesy must always be truth, as really all forms of good-breeding point that way.
His arrival in each place, the arrival of a gentleman of France, is an event of some consequence.
Wherever he goes, he pays a visit to whatever prince or gentleman of note resides upon his road, as a duty to himself and to civilization.
When he leaves any house in which he has lodged for a few weeks, he causes his arms to be painted and hung up as a perpetual sign to the house, as was the custom of gentlemen.
The complement of this graceful self-respect, and that of all the points of good breeding I most require and insist upon, is deference.
I like that every chair should be a throne, and hold a king.
I prefer a tendency to stateliness, to an excess of fellowship.
Let the incommunicable objects of nature and the metaphysical isolation of man teach us independence.
In all things I would have the island of a man inviolate.
Let us sit apart as the gods, talking from peak to peak all round Olympus.
No degree of affection need invade this religion.
This is myrrh and rosemary to keep the other sweet.
If they forgive too much, all slides into confusion and meanness.
A gentleman makes no noise: a lady is serene Proportionate is our disgust at those invaders who fill a studious house with blast and running, to secure some paltry convenience.
Not less I dislike a low sympathy of each with his neighbors's needs.
Must we have a good understanding with one another's palates? as foolish people who have lived long together, know when each wants salt or sugar.
I pray my companion, if he wishes for bread, to ask me for bread, and if he wishes for sassafras or arsenic, to ask me for them, and not to hold out his plate, as if I knew already.
Every natural function can be dignified by deliberation and privacy.
The flower of courtesy does not very well bide handling, but if we dare to open another leaf, and explore what parts go to its conformation, we shall find also an intellectual quality.
To the leaders of men, the brain as well as the flesh and the heart must furnish a proportion.
Defect in manners is usually the defect of fine perceptions.
Men are too coarsely made for the delicacy of beautiful carriage and customs.
It is not quite sufficient to good breeding, a union of kindness and independence.
We imperatively require a perception of, and a homage to, beauty in our companions.
Other virtues are in request in the field and work yard, but a certain degree of taste is not to be spared in those we sit with.
I could better eat with one who did not respect the truth or the laws, than with a sloven and unpresentable person.
Moral qualities rule the world, but at short distances the senses are despotic.
The same discrimination of fit and fair runs out, if with less rigor, into all parts of life.
The average spirit of the energetic class is good sense, acting under certain limitations and to certain ends.
Social in its nature, it respects everything which tends to unite men.
The person who screams, or uses the superlative degree, or converses with heat, puts whole drawing-rooms to flight.
You must have genius, or a prodigious usefulness, if you will hide the want of measure.
This perception comes in to polish and perfect the parts of the social instrument.
Society will pardon much to genius and special gifts, but, being in its nature a convention, it loves what is conventional, or what belongs to coming together.
That makes the good and bad of manners, namely, what helps or hinders fellowship.
For, fashion is not good sense absolute, but relative; not good sense private, but good sense entertaining company.
And besides the general infusion of wit to heighten civility, the direct splendor of intellectual power is ever welcome in fine society as the costliest addition to its rule and its credit.
The dry light must shine in to adorn our festival, but it must be tempered and shaded, or that will also offend.
Accuracy is essential to beauty, and quick perceptions to politeness, but not too quick perceptions.
One may be too punctual and too precise.
He must leave the omniscience of business at the door, when he comes into the palace of beauty.
Insight we must have, or we shall run against one another, and miss the way to our food; but intellect is selfish and barren.
The secret of success in society, is a certain heartiness and sympathy.
A man who is not happy in the company, cannot find any word in his memory that will fit the occasion.
All his information is a little impertinent.
A man who is happy there, finds in every turn of the conversation equally lucky occasions for the introduction of that which he has to say.
England, which is rich in gentlemen, furnished, in the beginning of the present century, a good model of that genius which the world loves, in Mr.
Another anecdote is so close to my matter, that I must hazard the story.
Fox will always hold the first place in an assembly at the Tuileries."
We may easily seem ridiculous in our eulogy of courtesy, whenever we insist on benevolence as its foundation.
The painted phantasm Fashion rises to cast a species of derision on what we say.
Life owes much of its spirit to these sharp contrasts.
Fashion which affects to be honor, is often, in all men's experience, only a ballroom code.
I know that a comic disparity would be felt, if we should enter the acknowledged 'first circles,' and apply these terrific standards of justice, beauty, and benefit, to the individuals actually found there.
Monarchs and heroes, sages and lovers, these gallants are not.
Fashion has many classes and many rules of probation and admission; and not the best alone.
Another mode is to pass through all the degrees, spending a year and a day in St.
Yet these fineries may have grace and wit.
Let there be grotesque sculpture about the gates and offices of temples.
Let the creed and commandments even have the saucy homage of parody.
The forms of politeness universally express benevolence in superlative degrees.
What if they are in the mouths of selfish men, and used as means of selfishness?
What if the false gentleman almost bows the true out of the world?
What if the false gentleman contrives so to address his companion, as civilly to exclude all others from his discourse, and also to make them feel excluded?
Real service will not lose its nobleness.
All generosity is not merely French and sentimental; nor is it to be concealed, that living blood and a passion of kindness does at last distinguish God's gentleman from Fashion's.
And these are the centers of society, on which it returns for fresh impulses.
These are the creators of Fashion, which is an attempt to organize beauty of behavior.
The beautiful and the generous are in the theory, the doctors and apostles of this church: Scipio, and the Cid, and Sir Philip Sidney, and Washington, and every pure and valiant heart, who worshiped Beauty by word and by deed.
The persons who constitute the natural aristocracy, are not found in the actual aristocracy, or only on its edge; as the chemical energy of the spectrum is found to be greatest just outside of the spectrum.
Yet that is the infirmity of the seneschals, who do not know their sovereign, when he appears.
The theory of society supposes the existence and sovereignty of these.
And this is constituted of those persons in whom heroic dispositions are native, with the love of beauty, the delight in society, and the power to embellish the passing day.
Because, elegance comes of no breeding, but of birth.
There must be romance of character, or the most fastidious exclusion of impertinencies will not avail.
It must be genius which takes that direction: it must be not courteous, but courtesy.
High behavior is as rare in fiction as it is in fact.
Scott is praised for the fidelity with which he painted the demeanor and conversation of the superior classes.
His lords brave each other in smart epigrammatic speeches, but the dialogue is in costume, and does not please on the second reading; it is not warm with life.
In Shakespeare alone, the speakers do not strut and bridle, the dialogue is easily great, and he adds to so many titles that of being the best-bred man in England, and in Christendom.
Once or twice in a lifetime we are permitted to enjoy the charm of noble manners, in the presence of a man or woman who have no bar in their nature, but whose character emanates freely in their word and gesture.
A beautiful form is better than a beautiful face: a beautiful behavior is better than a beautiful form: it gives a higher pleasure than statues or pictures; it is the finest of the fine arts.
A man is but a little thing in the midst of the objects of nature, yet, by the moral quality radiating from his countenance, he may abolish all considerations of magnitude, and in his manners equal the majesty of the world.
The open air and the fields, the street and public chambers, are the places where Man executes his will; let him yield or divide the scepter at the door of the house.
Woman, with her instinct of behavior, instantly detects in man a love of trifles, any coldness or imbecility, or, in short, any want of that large, flowing, and magnanimous deportment, which is indispensable as an exterior in the hall.
Our American institutions have been friendly to her, and at this moment I esteem it a chief felicity of this country, that it excels in women.
A certain awkward consciousness of inferiority in the men, may give rise to the new chivalry in behalf of Woman's Rights.
Certainly, let her be as much better placed in the laws and in social forms, as the most zealous reformer can ask, but I confide so entirely in her inspiring and musical nature, that I believe only herself can show us how she shall be served.
We say things we never thought to have said; for once, our walls of habitual reserve vanished, and left us at large; we were children playing with children in a wide field of flowers.
Steep us, we cried, in these influences, for days, for weeks, and we shall be sunny poets, and will write out in many-colored words the romance that you are.
Where she is present, all others will be more than they are wont.
She was a unit and whole, so that whatsoever she did, became her.
She had too much sympathy and desire to please, than that you could say, her manners were marked with dignity, yet no princess could surpass her clear and erect demeanor on each occasion.
She did not study the Persian grammar, nor the books of the seven poets, but all the poems of the seven seemed to be written upon her.
They have yet to learn that its seeming grandeur is shadowy and relative: it is great by their allowance: its proudest gates will fly open at the approach of their courage and virtue.
For the present distress, however, of those who are predisposed to suffer from the tyrannies of this caprice, there are easy remedies.
To remove your residence a couple of miles, or at most four, will commonly relieve the most extreme susceptibility.
For, the advantages which fashion values are plants which thrive in very confined localities, in a few streets, namely.
Out of this precinct, they go for nothing; are of no use in the farm, in the forest, in the market, in war, in the nuptial society, in the literary or scientific circle, at sea, in friendship, in the heaven of thought or virtue.
But we have lingered long enough in these painted courts.
The worth of the thing signified must vindicate our taste for the emblem.
Everything that is called fashion and courtesy humbles itself before the cause and fountain of honor, creator of titles and dignities, namely, the heart of love.
This is the royal blood, this the fire, which, in all countries and contingencies, will work after its kind and conquer ind expand all that approaches it.
This impoverishes the rich, suffering no grandeur but its own.
What is vulgar, but to refuse the claim on acute and conclusive reasons?
What is gentle, but to allow it, and give their heart and yours lone holiday from the national caution?
Without the rich heart, wealth is an ugly beggar.
And the madness which he harbored, he did not share.
Is not this to be rich? this only to be rightly rich?
But I shall hear without pain, that I play the courtier very ill, and talk of that which I do not well understand.
It is easy to see, that what is called by distinction society and fashion, has good laws as well as bad, has much that is necessary, and much that is absurd.
Gifts of one who loved me-- 'Twas high time they came; When he ceased to love me, Time they stopped for shame.
But the impediment lies in the choosing.
If, at any time, it comes into my head that a present is due from me to somebody, I am puzzled what to give, until the opportunity is gone.
Flowers and fruits are always fit presents; flowers, because they are a proud assertion that a ray of beauty outvalues all the utilities of the world.
These gay natures contrast with the somewhat stern countenance of ordinary nature: they are like music heard out of a work-house.
Yet these delicate flowers look like the frolic and interference of love and beauty.
Men use to tell us that we love flattery, even though we are not deceived by it, because it shows that we are of importance enough to be courted.
Something like that pleasure, the flowers give us: what am I to whom these sweet hints are addressed?
If a man should send to me to come a hundred miles to visit him, and should set before me a basket of fine summer-fruit, I should think there was some proportion between the labor and the reward.
For common gifts, necessity makes pertinences and beauty every day, and one is glad when an imperative leaves him no option, since if the man at the door have no shoes, you have not to consider whether you could procure him a paint-box.
And as it is always pleasing to see a man eat bread or drink water, in the house or out of doors, so it is always a great satisfaction to supply these first wants.
If it be a fantastic desire, it is better to leave to others the office of punishing him.
But our tokens of compliment and love are for the most part barbarous.
Rings and other jewels are not gifts, but apologies for gifts.
Therefore the poet brings his poem; the shepherd, his lamb; the farmer, corn; the miner, a gem; the sailor, coral and shells; the painter, his picture; the girl, a handkerchief of her own sewing.
But it is a cold lifeless business when you go to the shops to buy me something which does not represent your life and talent, but a goldsmith's.
The law of benefits is a difficult channel, which requires careful sailing, or rude boats.
It is not the office of a man to receive gifts.
The hand that feeds us is in some danger of being bitten.
We can receive anything from love, for that is a way of receiving it from ourselves; but not from any one who assumes to bestow.
We sometimes hate the meat which we eat, because there seems something of degrading dependence in living by it.
We arraign society, if it do not give us besides earth, and fire, and water, opportunity, love, reverence, and objects of veneration.
He is a good man, who can receive a gift well.
We are either glad or sorry at a gift, and both emotions are unbecoming.
Some violence, I think, is done, some degradation borne, when I rejoice or grieve at a gift.
The gift, to be true, must be the flowing of the giver unto me, correspondent to my flowing unto him.
When the waters are at level, then my goods pass to him, and his to me.
I say to him, How can you give me this pot of oil, or this flagon of wine, when all your oil and wine is mine, which belief of mine this gift seems to deny?
Hence the fitness of beautiful, not useful things for gifts.
For, the expectation of gratitude is mean, and is continually punished by the total insensibility of the obliged person.
It is a great happiness to get off without injury and heart-burning, from one who has had the ill luck to be served by you.
The reason of these discords I conceive to be, that there is no commensurability between a man and any gift.
You cannot give anything to a magnanimous person.
After you have served him, he at once puts you in debt by his magnanimity.
The service a man renders his friend is trivial and selfish, compared with the service he knows his friend stood in readiness to yield him, alike before he had begun to serve his friend, and now also.
Compared with that good-will I bear my friend, the benefit it is in my power to render him seems small.
Besides, our action on each other, good as well as evil, is so incidental and at random, that we can seldom hear the acknowledgments of any person who would thank us for a benefit, without some shame and humiliation.
We can rarely strike a direct stroke, but must be content with an oblique one; we seldom have the satisfaction of yielding a direct benefit, which is directly received.
But rectitude scatters favors on every side without knowing it, and receives with wonder the thanks of all people.
I fear to breathe any treason against the majesty of love, which is the genius and god of gifts, and to whom we must not affect to prescribe.
Let him give kingdoms or flower-leaves indifferently.
There are persons from whom we always expect fairy tokens; let us not cease to expect them.
This is prerogative, and not to be limited by our municipal rules.
For the rest, I like to see that we cannot be bought and sold.
The best of hospitality and of generosity is also not in the will, but in fate.
I find that I am not much to you; you do not need me; you do not feel me; then am I thrust out of doors, though you proffer me house and lands.
No services are of any value, but only likeness.
When I have attempted to join myself to others by services, it proved an intellectual trick--no more.
They eat your service like apples, and leave you out.
But love them, and they feel for you, and delight in you all the time.
The rounded world is fair to see, Nine times folded in mystery: Though baffled seers cannot impart The secret of its laboring heart, Throb thine with Nature's throbbing breast, And all is clear from east to west.
Spirit that lurks each form within Beckons to spirit of its kin; Self-kindled every atom glows, And hints the future which it owes.
To have lived through all its sunny hours, seems longevity enough.
The solitary places do not seem quite lonely.
At the gates of the forest, the surprised man of the world is forced to leave his city estimates of great and small, wise and foolish.
The knapsack of custom falls off his back with the first step he makes into these precincts.
Here is sanctity which shames our religions, and reality which discredits our heroes.
Here we find nature to be the circumstance which dwarfs every other circumstance, and judges like a god all men that come to her.
We have crept out of our close and crowded houses into the night and morning, and we see what majestic beauties daily wrap us in their bosom.
How willingly we would escape the barriers which render them comparatively impotent, escape the sophistication and second thought, and suffer nature to entrance us.
The tempered light of the woods is like a perpetual morning, and is stimulating and heroic.
The anciently reported spells of these places creep on us.
The stems of pines, hemlocks, and oaks, almost gleam like iron on the excited eye.
The incommunicable trees begin to persuade us to live with them, and quit our life of solemn trifles.
Here no history, or church, or state, is interpolated on the divine sky and the immortal year.
These enchantments are medicinal, they sober and heal us.
These are plain pleasures, kindly and native to us.
We come to our own, and make friends with matter, which the ambitious chatter of the schools would persuade us to despise.
We never can part with it; the mind loves its old home: as water to our thirst, so is the rock, the ground, to our eyes, and hands, and feet.
It is firm water: it is cold flame: what health, what affinity!
Ever an old friend, ever like a dear friend and brother, when we chat affectedly with strangers, comes in this honest face, and takes a grave liberty with us, and shames us out of our nonsense.
Cities give not the human senses room enough.
We go out daily and nightly to feed the eyes on the horizon, and require so much scope, just as we need water for our bath.
There are all degrees of natural influence, from these quarantine powers of nature, up to her dearest and gravest ministrations to the imagination and the soul.
There is the bucket of cold water from the spring, the wood-fire to which the chilled traveler rushes for safety,--and there is the sublime moral of autumn and of noon.
We nestle in nature, and draw our living as parasites from her roots and grains, and we receive glances from the heavenly bodies, which call us to solitude, and foretell the remotest future.
The blue zenith is the point in which romance and reality meet.
It seems as if the day was not wholly profane, in which we have given heed to some natural object.
These sunset clouds, these delicately emerging stars, with their private and ineffable glances, signify it and proffer it.
I am taught the poorness of our invention, the ugliness of towns and palaces.
Art and luxury have early learned that they must work as enhancement and sequel to this original beauty.
I can no longer live without elegance: but a countryman shall be my master of revels.
He who knows the most, he who knows what sweets and virtues are in the ground, the waters, the plants, the heavens, and how to come at these enchantments, is the rich and royal man.
Only as far as masters of the world have called in nature to their aid, can they reach the height of magnificence.
I do not wonder that the landed interest should be invincible in the state with these dangerous auxiliaries.
These bribe and invite; not kings, not palaces, not men, not women, but these tender and poetic stars, eloquent of secret promises.
We heard what the rich man said, we knew of his villa, his grove, his wine, and his company, but the provocation and point of the invitation came out of these beguiling stars.
When the rich tax the poor with servility and obsequiousness, they should consider the effect of man reputed to be the possessors of nature, on imaginative minds.
Ah! if the rich were rich as the poor fancy riches!
A boy hears a military band play on the field at night, and he has kings and queens, and famous chivalry palpably before him.
Can a musical note be so lofty, so haughtily beautiful!
To the poor young poet, thus fabulous is his picture of society; he is loyal; he respects the rich; they are rich for the sake of his imagination; how poor his fancy would be, if they were not rich!
In every landscape, the point of astonishment is the meeting of the sky and the earth, and that is seen from the first hillock as well as from the top of the Alleghanies.
The uprolled clouds and the colors of morning and evening, will transfigure maples and alders.
The difference between landscape and landscape is small, but there is great difference in the beholders.
There is nothing so wonderful in any particular landscape, as the necessity of being beautiful under which every landscape lies.
One can hardly speak directly of it without excess.
I suppose this shame must have a good reason.
The fop of fields is no better than his brother of Broadway.
I would not be frivolous before the admirable reserve and prudence of time, yet I cannot renounce the right of returning often to this old topic.
Literature, poetry, science, are the homage of man to this unfathomed secret, concerning which no sane man can affect an indifference or incuriosity.
It is loved as the city of God, although, or rather because there is no citizen.
The sunset is unlike anything that is underneath it: it wants men.
And the beauty of nature must always seem unreal and mocking, until the landscape has human figures, that are as good as itself.
If there were good men, there would never be this rapture in nature.
If the king is in the palace nobody looks at the walls.
It is when he is gone, and the house is filled with grooms and gazers, that we turn from the people, to find relief in the majestic men that are suggested by the pictures and architecture.
The critics who complain of the sickly separation of the beauty of nature from the thing to be done, must consider that our hunting of the picturesque is inseparable from our protest against false society.
Man is fallen; nature is erect, and serves as a differential thermometer, detecting the presence or absence of the divine sentiment in man.
By fault of our dulness and selfishness, we are looking up to nature, but when we are convalescent, nature will look up to us.
We see the foaming brook with compunction; if our own life flowed with the right energy, we should shame the brook.
The stream of zeal sparkles with real fire, and not with reflex rays of sun and moon.
Nature may be as selfishly studied as trade.
Astronomy to the selfish becomes astrology; psychology, mesmerism (with intent to show where our spoons are gone); and anatomy and physiology become phrenology and palmistry.
It publishes itself in creatures, reaching from particles and spicula, through transformation on transformation to the highest symmetries, arriving at consummate results without a shock or a leap.
A little heat, that is, a little motion, is all that differences the bald, dazzling white, and deadly cold poles of the earth from the prolific tropical climates.
All changes pass without violence, by reason of the two cardinal conditions of boundless space and boundless time.
We know nothing rightly, for want of perspective.
How far off yet is the trilobite! how far the quadruped! how inconceivably remote is man!
Yet all must come, as surely as the first atom has two sides.
Motion or change, and identity or rest, are the first and second secrets of nature: Motion and Rest.
The whole code of her laws may be written on the thumb-nail, or the signet of a ring.
The whirling bubble on the surface of a brook, admits us to the secret of the mechanics of the sky.
Every shell on the beach is a key to it.
Compound it how she will, star, sand, fire, water, tree, man, it is still one stuff, and betrays the same properties.
Nature is always consistent, though she feigns to contravene her own laws.
She keeps her laws, and seems to transcend them.
She arms and equips an animal to find its place and living in the earth, and, at the same time, she arms and equips another animal to destroy it.
Space exists to divide creatures; but by clothing the sides of a bird with a few feathers, she gives him a petty omnipresence.
The direction is forever onward, but the artist still goes back for materials, and begins again with the first elements on the most advanced stage: otherwise, all goes to ruin.
If we look at her work, we seem to catch a glance of a system in transition.
Plants are the young of the world, vessels of health and vigor; but they grope ever upward toward consciousness; the trees are imperfect men, and seem to bemoan their imprisonment, rooted in the ground.
The animal is the novice and probationer of a more advanced order.
The men, though young, having tasted the first drop from the cup of thought, are already dissipated: the maples and ferns are still uncorrupt; yet no doubt, when they come to consciousness, they too will curse and swear.
Flowers so strictly belong to youth, that we adult men soon come to feel, that their beautiful generations concern not us: we have had our day; now let the children have theirs.
The flowers jilt us, and we are old bachelors with our ridiculous tenderness.
Things are so strictly related, that according to the skill of the eye, from any one object the parts and properties of any other may be predicted.
If we had eyes to see it, a bit of stone from the city wall would certify us of the necessity that man must exist, as readily as the city.
That identity makes us all one, and reduces to nothing great intervals on our customary scale.
We talk of deviations from natural life, as if artificial life were not also natural.
If we consider how much we are nature's, we need not be superstitious about towns, as if that terrific or benefic force did not find us there also, and fashion cities.
Nature, who made the mason, made the house.
We may easily hear too much of rural influences.
This guiding identity runs through all the surprises and contrasts of the piece, and characterizes every law.
Man carries the world in his head, the whole astronomy and chemistry suspended in a thought.
Because the history of nature is charactered in his brain, therefore is he the prophet and discoverer of her secrets.
Every known fact in natural science was divined by the presentiment of somebody, before it was actually verified.
A man does not tie his shoe without recognizing laws which bind the farthest regions of nature: moon, plant, gas, crystal, are concrete geometry and numbers.
Common sense knows its own, and recognizes the fact at first sight in chemical experiment.
If the identity expresses organized rest, the counter action runs also into organization.
Once heave the ball from the hand, and we can show how all this mighty order grew." "A very unreasonable postulate," said the metaphysicians, "and a plain begging of the question.
Could you not prevail to know the genesis of projection, as well as the continuation of it?" Nature, meanwhile, had not waited for the discussion, but, right or wrong, bestowed the impulse, and the balls rolled.
It was no great affair, a mere push, but the astronomers were right in making much of it, for there is no end of the consequences of the act.
That famous aboriginal push propagates itself through all the balls of the system, and through every atom of every ball, through all the races of creatures, and through the history and performances of every individual.
Exaggeration is in the course of things.
Nature sends no creature, no man into the world, without adding a small excess of his proper quality.
Given the planet, it is still necessary to add the impulse; so, to every creature nature added a little violence of direction in its proper path, a shove to put it on its way; in every instance, a slight generosity, a drop too much.
Without electricity the air would rot, and without this violence of direction which men and women have, without a spice of bigot and fanatic, no excitement, no efficiency.
Every act hath some falsehood of exaggeration in it.
And when now and then comes along some sad, sharp-eyed man, who sees how paltry a game is played, and refuses to play, but blabs the secret;--how then? is the bird flown?
But Nature has answered her purpose with the curly, dimpled lunatic.
She has tasked every faculty, and has secured the symmetrical growth of the bodily frame, by all these attitudes and exertions,--an end of the first importance, which could not be trusted to any care less perfect than her own.
This glitter, this opaline luster plays round the top of every toy to his eye, to insure his fidelity, and he is deceived to his good.
We are made alive and kept alive by the same arts.
All things betray the same calculated profusion.
The excess of fear with which the animal frame is hedged round, shrinking from cold, starting at sight of a snake, or a sudden noise, protects us, through a multitude of groundless alarms, from some one real danger at last.
The lover seeks in marriage his private felicity and perfection, with no prospective end; and nature hides in his happiness her own end, namely, progeny, or the perpetuity of the race.
But the craft with which the world is made runs also into the mind and character of men.
No man is quite sane; each has a vein of folly in his composition, a slight determination of blood to the head, to make sure of holding him hard to some one point which nature had taken to heart.
Great causes are never tried on their merits; but the cause is reduced to particulars to suit the size of the partisans, and the contention is ever hottest on minor matters.
Not less remarkable is the overfaith of each man in the importance of what he has to do or say.
The poet, the prophet, has a higher value for what he utters than any hearer, and therefore it gets spoken.
Each prophet comes presently to identify himself with his thought, and to esteem his hat and shoes sacred.
However this may discredit such persons with the judicious, it helps them with the people, as it gives heat, pungency, and publicity to their words.
A similar experience is not infrequent in private life.
Each young and ardent person writes a diary, in which, when the hours of prayer and penitence arrive, he inscribes his soul.
The pages thus written are, to him, burning and fragrant: he reads them on his knees by midnight and by the morning star; he wets them with his tears: they are sacred; too good for the world, and hardly yet to be shown to the dearest friend.
This is the man-child that is born to the soul, and her life still circulates in the babe.
The umbilical cord has not yet been cut.
After some time has elapsed, he begins to wish to admit his friend to this hallowed experience, and with hesitation, yet with firmness, exposes the pages to his eye.
The friend coldly turns them over, and passes from the writing to conversation, with easy transition, which strikes the other party with astonishment and vexation.
Days and nights of fervid life, of communion with angels of darkness and of light, have engraved their shadowy characters on that tear-stained book.
He suspects the intelligence or the heart of his friend.
A man can only speak, so long as he does not feel his speech to be partial and inadequate.
It is partial, but he does not see it to be so, whilst he utters it.
As soon as he is released from the instinctive and particular, and sees its partiality, he shuts his mouth in disgust.
For, no man can write anything, who does not think that what he writes is for the time the history of the world; or do anything well, who does not esteem his work to be of importance.
My work may be of none, but I must not think it is of none, or I shall not do it with impunity.
In like manner, there is throughout nature something mocking, something that leads us on and on, but arrives nowhere, keeps no faith with us.
Every end is prospective of some other end, which is also temporary; a round and final success nowhere.
We are encamped in nature, not domesticated.
Hunger and thirst lead us on to eat and to drink; but bread and wine, mix and cook them how you will, leave us hungry and thirsty, after the stomach is full.
It is the same with all our arts and performances.
Our music, our poetry, our language itself are not satisfactions, but suggestions.
The hunger for wealth, which reduces the planet to a garden, fools the eager pursuer.
Plainly to secure the ends of good sense and beauty, from the intrusion of deformity or vulgarity of any kind.
What a train of means to secure a little conversation!
Could it not be had as well by beggars on the highway?
No, all these things came from successive efforts of these beggars to remove friction from the wheels of life, and give opportunity.
Thought, virtue, beauty, were the ends; but it was known that men of thought and virtue sometimes had the headache, or wet feet, or could lose good time, whilst the room was getting warm in winter days.
Unluckily, in the exertions necessary to remove these inconveniences, the main attention has been diverted to this object; the old aims have been lost sight of, and to remove friction has come to be the end.
They are like one who has interrupted the conversation of a company to make his speech, and now has forgotten what he went to say.
The appearance strikes the eye everywhere of an aimless society, of aimless nations.
Were the ends of nature so great and cogent, as to exact this immense sacrifice of men?
Quite analogous to the deceits in life, there is, as might be expected, a similar effect on the eye from the face of external nature.
There is in woods and waters a certain enticement and flattery, together with a failure to yield a present satisfaction.
This disappointment is felt in every landscape.
It is an odd jealousy; but the poet finds himself not near enough to this object.
The pine tree, the river, the bank of flowers before him, does not seem to be nature.
The present object shall give you this sense of stillness that follows a pageant which has just gone by.
What splendid distance, what recesses of ineffable pomp and loveliness in the sunset!
But who can go where they are, or lay his hand or plant his foot thereon?
Off they fall from the round world forever and ever.
It is the same among men and women as among the silent trees; always a referred existence, an absence, never a presence and satisfaction.
Is it, that beauty can never be grasped? in persons and in landscapes is equally inaccessible?
The accepted and betrothed lover has lost the wildest charm of his maiden in her acceptance of him.
She was heaven whilst he pursued her as a star: she cannot be heaven, if she stoops to such a one as he.
What shall we say of this omnipresent appearance of that first projectile impulse, of this flattery and balking of so many well-meaning creatures?
Must we not suppose somewhere in the universe a slight treachery and derision?
Are we not engaged to a serious resentment of this use that is made of us?
Are we tickled trout, and fools of nature?
One looks at the face of heaven and earth lays all petulance at rest, and soothes us to wiser convictions.
To the intelligent, nature converts itself into a vast promise, and will not be rashly explained.
Alas! the same sorcery has spoiled his skill; no syllable can he shape on his lips.
Her mighty orbit vaults like the fresh rainbow into the deep, but no archangel's wing was yet strong enough to follow it, and report of the return of the curve.
But it also appears, that our actions are seconded and disposed to greater conclusions than we designed.
We are escorted on every hand through life by spiritual agents, and a beneficent purpose lies in wait for us.
We cannot bandy words with nature, or deal with her as we deal with persons.
If we measure our individual forces against hers, we may easily feel as if we were the sport of an insuperable destiny.
The uneasiness which the thought of our helplessness in the chain of causes occasions us, results from looking too much at one condition of nature, namely, Motion.
But the drag is never taken from the wheel.
Wherever the impulse exceeds the Rest or Identity insinuates its compensation.
After every foolish day we sleep off the fumes and furies of its hours; and though we are always engaged with particulars, and often enslaved to them, we bring with us to every experiment the innate universal laws.
These, while they exist in the mind as ideas, stand around us in nature forever embodied, a present sanity to expose and cure the insanity of men.
Our servitude to particulars betrays us into a hundred foolish expectations.
We anticipate a new era from the invention of a locomotive, or a balloon; the new engine brings with it the old checks.
In these checks and impossibilities, however, we find our advantage, not less than in impulses.
Let the victory fall where it will, we are on that side.
The reality is more excellent than the report.
Here is no ruin, no discontinuity, no spent ball.
The divine circulations never rest nor linger.
Nature is the incarnation of a thought, and turns to a thought again, as ice becomes water and gas.
The world is mind precipitated, and the volatile essence is forever escaping again into the state of free thought.
Hence the virtue and pungency of the influence on the mind, of natural objects, whether inorganic or organized.
Man imprisoned, man crystallized, man vegetative, speaks to man impersonated.
That power which does not respect quantity, which makes the whole and the particle its equal channel, delegates its smile to the morning, and distills its essence into every drop of rain.
Every moment instructs and every object: for wisdom is infused into every form.
It has been poured into us as blood; it convulsed us as pain; it slid into us as pleasure; it enveloped us in dull, melancholy days, or in days of cheerful labor; we did not guess its essence, until after a long time.
Great men are more distinguished by range and extent, than by originality.
If we require the originality which consists in weaving, like a spider, their web from their own bowels; in finding clay, and making bricks, and building the house; no great men are original.
Nor does valuable originality consist in unlikeness to other men.
The hero is in the press of knights, and the thick of events; and, seeing what men want, and sharing their desire, he adds the needful length of sight and of arm, to come to the desired point.
The greatest genius is the most indebted man.
A poet is no rattlebrain, saying what comes uppermost and, because he says everything, saying, at last, something good; but a heart in unison with his time and country.
There is nothing whimsical and fantastic in his production, but sweet and sad earnest, freighted with the weightiest convictions, and pointed with the most determined aim which any man or class knows of in his times.
He stands where all the eyes of men look one way, and their hands all point in the direction in which he should go.
The church has reared him amidst rites and pomps, and he carries out the advice which her music gave him, and builds a cathedral needed by her chants and processions.
He finds a war raging: it educates him, by trumpet, in barracks, and he betters the instruction.
He finds two counties groping to bring coal, or flour, or fish, from the place of production to the place of consumption, and he hits on a railroad.
Every master has found his materials collected, and his power lay in his sympathy with his people, and in his love of the materials he wrought in.
What an economy of power! and what a compensation for the shortness of life!
The world has brought him thus far on his way.
The human race has gone out before him, sunk the hills, filled the hollows, and bridged the rivers.
Men, nations, poets, artisans, women, all have worked for him, and he enters into their labors.
Choose any other thing, out of the line of tendency, out of the national feeling and history, and he would have all to do for himself: his powers would be expended in the first preparations.
Great genial power, one would almost say, consists in not being original at all; in being altogether receptive; in letting the world do all, and suffering the spirit of the hour to pass unobstructed through the mind.
The court took offense easily at political allusions, and attempted to suppress them.
Inn-yards, houses without roofs, and extemporaneous inclosures at country fairs, were the ready theaters of strolling players.
Probably king, prelate, and puritan, all found their own account in it.
It had become, by all causes, a national interest,--by no means conspicuous, so that some great scholar would have thought of treating it in an English history,--but not a whit less considerable, because it was cheap, and of no account, like a baker's shop.
The secure possession, by the stage, of the public mind, is of the first importance to the poet who works for it.
Here is audience and expectation prepared.
In the case of Shakspeare there is much more.
All the mass has been treated, with more or less skill, by every playwright, and the prompter has the soiled and tattered manuscripts.
It is now no longer possible to say who wrote them first.
They have been the property of the Theater so long, and so many rising geniuses have enlarged or altered them, inserting a speech, or a whole scene, or adding a song, that no man can any longer claim copyright in this work of numbers.
We have few readers, many spectators and hearers.
Shakspeare, in common with his comrades, esteemed the mass of old plays, waste stock, in which any experiment could be freely tried.
The rude warm blood of the living England circulated in the play, as in street-ballads, and gave body which he wanted to his airy and majestic fancy.
The poet needs a ground in popular tradition on which he may work, and which, again, may restrain his art within the due temperance.
It holds him to the people, supplies a foundation for his edifice; and, in furnishing so much work done to his hand, leaves him at leisure, and in full strength for the audacities of his imagination.
In short, the poet owes to his legend what sculpture owed to the temple.
Sculpture in Egypt, and in Greece, grew up in subordination to architecture.
As soon as the statue was begun for itself, and with no reference to the temple or palace, the art began to decline: freak, extravagance, and exhibition, took the place of the old temperance.
Malone's sentence is an important piece of external history.
In Henry VIII, I think I see plainly the cropping out of the original rock on which his own finer stratum was laid.
The first play was written by a superior, thoughtful man, with a vicious ear.
I can mark his lines, and know well their cadence.
Shakspeare knew that tradition supplies a better fable than any invention can.
If he lost any credit of design, he augmented his resources; and, at that day, our petulant demand for originality was not so much pressed.
There was no literature for the million.
The universal reading, the cheap press, were unknown.
A great poet, who appears in illiterate times, absorbs into his sphere all the light which is anywhere radiating.
Other men say wise things as well as he; only they say a good many foolish things, and do not know when they have spoken wisely.
He knows the sparkle of the true stone, and puts it in high place, wherever he finds it.
And they are librarians and historiographers, as well as poets.
Each romancer was heir and dispenser of all the hundred tales of the world,--
One is charmed with the opulence which feeds so many pensioners.
He steals by this apology,--that what he takes has no worth where he finds it, and the greatest where he leaves it.
It has come to be practically a sort of rule in literature, that a man, having once shown himself capable of original writing, is entitled thenceforth to steal from the writings of others at discretion.
Thought is the property of him who can entertain it; and of him who can adequately place it.
A certain awkwardness marks the use of borrowed thoughts; but, as soon as we have learned what to do with them, they become our own.
Did he feel himself overmatched by any companion?
The appeal is to the consciousness of the writer.
All the debts which such a man could contract to other wit, would never disturb his consciousness of originality: for the ministrations of books, and of other minds, are a whiff of smoke to that most private reality with which he has conversed.
It is easy to see that what is best written or done by genius, in the world, was no man's work, but came by wide social labor, when a thousand wrought like one, sharing the same impulse.
But it was not made by one man, or at one time; but centuries and churches brought it to perfection.
There never was a time when there was not some translation existing.
The translation of Plutarch gets its excellence by being translation on translation.
There never was a time when there was none.
All the truly idiomatic and national phrases are kept, and all others successively picked out, and thrown away.
Something like the same process had gone on, long before, with the originals of these books.
The world takes liberties with world-books.
In the composition of such works, the time thinks, the market thinks, the mason, the carpenter, the merchant, the farmer, the fop, all think for us.
A popular player,--nobody suspected he was the poet of the human race; and the secret was kept as faithfully from poets and intellectual men, as from courtiers and frivolous people.
He no doubt thought the praise he has conceded to him generous, and esteemed himself, out of all question, the better poet of the two.
If it need wit to know wit, according to the proverb, Shakspeare's time should be capable of recognizing it.
It took a century to make it suspected; and not until two centuries had passed, after his death, did any criticism which we think adequate begin to appear.
Now, literature, philosophy, and thought, are Shakspearized.
His mind is the horizon beyond which, at present, we do not see.
Our ears are educated to music by his rhythm.
The Shakspeare Society have inquired in all directions, advertised the missing facts, offered money for any information that will lead to proof; and with what result?
Beside some important illustration of the history of the English stage, to which I have adverted, they have gleaned a few facts touching the property, and dealings in regard to property, of the poet.
He was a good-natured sort of man, an actor and shareholder in the theater, not in any striking manner distinguished from other actors and managers.
I admit the importance of this information.
It is well worth the pains that have been taken to procure it.
But whatever scraps of information concerning his condition these researches may have rescued, they can shed no light upon that infinite invention which is the concealed magnet of his attraction for us.
It is the essence of poetry to spring, like the rainbow daughter of Wonder, from the invisible, to abolish the past, and refuse all history.
The recitation begins; one golden word leaps out immortal from all this painted pedantry, and sweetly torments us with invitations to its own inaccessible homes.
That imagination which dilates the closet he writes in to the world's dimension, crowds it with agents in rank and order, as quickly reduces the big reality to be the glimpses of the moon.
These tricks of his magic spoil for us the illusions of the green-room.
Did Shakspeare confide to any notary or parish recorder, sacristan, or surrogate, in Stratford, the genesis of that delicate creation?
Shakspeare is the only biographer of Shakspeare; and even he can tell nothing, except to the Shakspeare in us; that is, to our most apprehensive and sympathetic hour.
What trait of his private mind has he hidden in his dramas?
One can discern, in his ample pictures of the gentleman and the king, what forms and humanities pleased him; his delight in troops of friends, in large hospitality, in cheerful giving.
So far from Shakspeare's being the least known, he is the one person, in all modern history, known to us.
What point of morals, of manners, of economy, of philosophy, of religion, of taste, of the conduct of life, has he not settled?
What mystery has he not signified his knowledge of?
What office, or function, or district of man's work, has he not remembered?
What maiden has not found him finer than her delicacy?
What gentleman has he not instructed in the rudeness of his behavior?
Some able and appreciating critics think no criticism on Shakspeare valuable, that does not rest purely on the dramatic merit; that he is falsely judged as poet and philosopher.
I think as highly as these critics of his dramatic merit, who still think it secondary.
He was a full man, who liked to talk; a brain exhaling thoughts and images, which, seeking vent, found the drama next at hand.
Had he been less, we should have had to consider how well he filled his place, how good a dramatist he was,--and he is the best in the world.
So it fares with the wise Shakspeare and his book of life.
And the importance of this wisdom of life sinks the form, as of Drama or Epic, out of notice. 'Tis like making a question concerning the paper on which a king's message is written.
Shakspeare is as much out of the category of eminent authors, as he is out of the crowd.
He is inconceivably wise; the others, conceivably.
A good reader can, in a sort, nestle into Plato's brain, and think from thence; but not into Shakspeare's.
For executive faculty, for creation, Shakspeare is unique.
He was the farthest reach of subtlety compatible with an individual self,--the subtilest of authors, and only just within the possibility of authorship.
With this wisdom of life, is the equal endowment of imaginative and of lyric power.
He clothed the creatures of his legend with form and sentiments, as if they were people who had lived under his roof; and few real men have left such distinct characters as these fictions.
And they spoke in language as sweet as it was fit.
Yet his talents never seduced him into an ostentation, nor did he harp on one string.
Give a man of talents a story to tell, and his partiality will presently appear.
He has certain observations, opinions, topics, which have some accidental prominence, and which he disposes all to exhibit.
He crams this part, and starves that other part, consulting not the fitness of the thing, but his fitness and strength.
But Shakspeare has no peculiarity, no importunate topic; but all is duly given; no veins, no curiosities: no cow-painter, no bird-fancier, no mannerist is he: he has no discoverable egotism: the great he tells greatly; the small, subordinately.
He is wise without emphasis or assertion; he is strong, as nature is strong, who lifts the land into mountain slopes without effort, and by the same rule as she floats a bubble in the air, and likes as well to do the one as the other.
This makes that equality of power in farce, tragedy, narrative, and love-songs; a merit so incessant, that each reader is incredulous of the perception of other readers.
This power of expression, or of transferring the inmost truth of things into music and verse, makes him the type of the poet, and has added a new problem to metaphysics.
This is that which throws him into natural history, as a main production of the globe, and as announcing new eras and ameliorations.
Things were mirrored in his poetry without loss or blur; he could paint the fine with precision, the great with compass: the tragic and the comic indifferently, and without any distortion or favor.
He carried his powerful execution into minute details, to a hair point; finishes an eyelash or a dimple as firmly as he draws a mountain; and yet these, like nature's, will bear the scrutiny of the solar microscope.
In short, he is the chief example to prove that more or less of production, more or fewer pictures, is a thing indifferent.
There are always objects; but there was never representation.
Here is perfect representation, at last; and now let the world of figures sit for their portraits.
No recipe can be given for the making of a Shakspeare; but the possibility of the translation of things into song is demonstrated.
His lyric power lies in the genius of the piece.
His means are as admirable as his ends; every subordinate invention, by which he helps himself to connect some irreconcilable opposites, is a poem too.
He is not reduced to dismount and walk, because his horses are running off with him in some distant direction; he always rides.
The finest poetry was first experienced: but the thought has suffered a transformation since it was an experience.
Cultivated men often attain a good degree of skill in writing verses; but it is easy to read, through their poems, their personal history: any one acquainted with parties can name every figure: this is Andrew, and that is Rachael.
It is a caterpillar with wings, and not yet a butterfly.
In the poet's mind, the fact has gone quite over into the new element of thought, and has lost all that is exuvial.
We say, from the truth and closeness of his pictures, that he knows the lesson by heart.
One more royal trait properly belongs to the poet.
I mean his cheerfulness, without which no man can be a poet,--for beauty is his aim.
He loves virtue, not for its obligation, but for its grace: he delights in the world, in man, in woman, for the lovely light that sparkles from them.
Beauty, the spirit of joy and hilarity, he sheds over the universe.
And the true bards have been noted for their firm and cheerful temper.
Homer lies in sunshine; Chaucer is glad and erect; and Saadi says, "It was rumored abroad that I was penitent; but what had I to do with repentance?" Not less sovereign and cheerful,--much more sovereign and cheerful, is the tone of Shakspeare.
His name suggests joy and emancipation to the heart of men.
If he should appear in any company of human souls, who would not march in his troop?
He touches nothing that does not borrow health and longevity from his festal style.
And now, how stands the account of man with this bard and benefactor, when in solitude, shutting our ears to the reverberations of his fame, we seek to strike the balance?
Solitude has austere lessons; it can teach us to spare both heroes and poets; and it weighs Shakspeare also, and finds him to share the halfness and imperfection of humanity.
Shakspeare employed them as colors to compose his picture.
He rested in their beauty; and never took the step which seemed inevitable to such genius, namely, to explore the virtue which resides in these symbols, and imparts this power,--what is that which they themselves say?
He converted the elements, which waited on his command, into entertainments.
But when the question is to life, and its materials, and its auxiliaries, how does he profit me?
Other admirable men have led lives in some sort of keeping with their thought; but this man, in wide contrast.
It must be conceded that these are half-views of half-men.
The world still wants its poet-priest, a reconciler, who shall not trifle with Shakspeare the player, nor shall grope in graves with Swedenborg the mourner; but who shall see, speak, and act, with equal inspiration.
For knowledge will brighten the sunshine; right is more beautiful than private affection; and love is compatible with universal wisdom.
What right have I to write on Prudence, whereof I have little, and that of the negative sort?
My prudence consists in avoiding and going without, not in the inventing of means and methods, not in adroit steering, not in gentle repairing.
I have no skill to make money spend well, no genius in my economy, and whoever sees my garden discovers that I must have some other garden.
Then I have the same title to write on prudence that I have to write on poetry or holiness.
We write from aspiration and antagonism, as well as from experience.
We paint those qualities which we do not possess.
The poet admires the man of energy and tactics; the merchant breeds his son for the church or the bar; and where a man is not vain and egotistic you shall find what he has not by his praise.
It is the outmost action of the inward life.
It moves matter after the laws of matter.
It is content to seek health of body by complying with physical conditions, and health of mind by the laws of the intellect.
It is legitimate when it is the Natural History of the soul incarnate, when it unfolds the beauty of laws within the narrow scope of the senses.
There are all degrees of proficiency in knowledge of the world.
It is sufficient to our present purpose to indicate three.
One class lives to the utility of the symbol, esteeming health and wealth a final good.
Another class live above this mark of the beauty of the symbol, as the poet and artist and the naturalist and man of science.
A third class live above the beauty of the symbol to the beauty of the thing signified; these are wise men.
The first class have common sense; the second, taste; and the third, spiritual perception.
This is a disease like a thickening of the skin until the vital organs are destroyed.
But culture, revealing the high origin of the apparent world and aiming at the perfection of the man as the end, degrades everything else, as health and bodily life, into means.
It sees prudence not to be a several faculty, but a name for wisdom and virtue conversing with the body and its wants.
Cultivated men always feel and speak so as if a great fortune, the achievement of a civil or social measure, great personal influence, a graceful and commanding address, had their value as proofs of the energy of the spirit.
The spurious prudence, making the senses final, is the god of sots and cowards, and is the subject of all comedy.
It is nature's joke, and therefore literature's.
The true prudence limits this sensualism by admitting the knowledge of an internal and real world.
This recognition once made,--the order of the world and the distribution of affairs and times being studied with the co-perception of their subordinate place, will reward any degree of attention.
Prudence does not go behind nature and ask whence it is?
It takes the laws of the world whereby man's being is conditioned, as they are, and keeps these laws that it may enjoy their proper good.
There revolve, to give bound and period to his being on all sides, the sun and moon, the great formalists in the sky: here lies stubborn matter, and will not swerve from its chemical routine.
Here is a planted globe, pierced and belted with natural laws and fenced and distributed externally with civil partitions and properties which impose new restraints on the young inhabitant.
We eat of the bread which grows in the field.
We live by the air which blows around us and we are poisoned by the air that is too cold or too hot, too dry or too wet.
Time, which shows so vacant, indivisible and divine in its coming, is slit and peddled into trifles and tatters.
A door is to be painted, a lock to be repaired.
I want wood or oil, or meal, or salt; the house smokes, or I have a headache; then the tax; and an affair to be transacted with a man without heart or brains, and the stinging recollection of an injurious or very awkward word,--these eat up the hours.
If we go a-fishing we must expect a wet coat.
Then climate is a great impediment to idle persons.
We often resolve to give up the care of the weather, but still we regard the clouds and the rain.
We are instructed by these petty experiences which usurp the hours and years.
The hard soil and four months of snow make the inhabitant of the northern temperate zone wiser and abler than his fellow who enjoys the fixed smile of the tropics.
The islander may ramble all day at will.
At night he may sleep on a mat under the moon, and wherever a wild date-tree grows, nature has, without a prayer even, spread a table for his morning meal.
The northerner is perforce a householder.
He must brew, bake, salt and preserve his food.
Such is the value of these matters that a man who knows other things can never know too much of these.
Let him, if he have hands, handle; if eyes, measure and discriminate; let him accept and hive every fact of chemistry, natural history and economics; the more he has, the less is he willing to spare any one.
Time is always bringing the occasions that disclose their value.
Some wisdom comes out of every natural and innocent action.
The domestic man, who loves no music so well as his kitchen clock and the airs which the logs sing to him as they burn on the hearth, has solaces which others never dream of.
The application of means to ends ensures victory and the songs of victory not less in a farm or a shop than in the tactics of party or of war.
In the rainy day he builds a work-bench, or gets his tool-box set in the corner of the barn-chamber, and stored with nails, gimlet, pincers, screwdriver and chisel.
Herein he tastes an old joy of youth and childhood, the cat-like love of garrets, presses and corn-chambers, and of the conveniences of long housekeeping.
His garden or his poultry-yard--very paltry places it may be--tells him many pleasant anecdotes.
One might find argument for optimism in the abundant flow of this saccharine element of pleasure in every suburb and extremity of the good world.
Let a man keep the law--any law,--and his way will be strown with satisfactions.
There is more difference in the quality of our pleasures than in the amount.
On the other hand, nature punishes any neglect of prudence.
If you think the senses final, obey their law.
If you believe in the soul, do not clutch at sensual sweetness before it is ripe on the slow tree of cause and effect.
It is vinegar to the eyes to deal with men of loose and imperfect perception.
But the discomfort of unpunctuality, of confusion of thought about facts, inattention to the wants of to-morrow, is of no nation.
The beautiful laws of time and space, once dislocated by our inaptitude, are holes and dens.
If the hive be disturbed by rash and stupid hands, instead of honey it will yield us bees.
Our words and actions to be fair must be timely.
Scatter brained and "afternoon men" spoil much more than their own affairs in spoiling the temper of those who deal with them.
I have seen a criticism on some paintings, of which I am reminded when I see the shiftless and unhappy men who are not true to their senses.
This property is the hitting, in all the figures we draw, the right centre of gravity.
I mean the placing the figures firm upon their feet, making the hands grasp, and fastening the eyes on the spot where they should look.
Even lifeless figures, as vessels and stools--let them be drawn ever so correctly--lose all effect so soon as they lack the resting upon their centre of gravity, and have a certain swimming and oscillating appearance.
Nevertheless it awakens a deeper impression than the contortions of ten crucified martyrs.
For, beside all the resistless beauty of form, it possesses in the highest degree the property of the perpendicularity of all the figures." This perpendicularity we demand of all the figures in this picture of life.
Let them stand on their feet, and not float and swing.
Let them discriminate between what they remember and what they dreamed.
But what man shall dare task another with imprudence?
The men we call greatest are least in this kingdom.
There is a certain fatal dislocation in our relation to nature, distorting all our modes of living and making every law our enemy, which seems at last to have aroused all the wit and virtue in the world to ponder the question of Reform.
We must call the highest prudence to counsel, and ask why health and beauty and genius should now be the exception rather than the rule of human nature?
We do not know the properties of plants and animals and the laws of nature, through our sympathy with the same; but this remains the dream of poets.
Poetry and prudence should be coincident.
Poets should be lawgivers; that is, the boldest lyric inspiration should not chide and insult, but should announce and lead the civil code and the day's work.
But now the two things seem irreconcilably parted.
We have violated law upon law until we stand amidst ruins, and when by chance we espy a coincidence between reason and the phenomena, we are surprised.
Beauty should be the dowry of every man and woman, as invariably as sensation; but it is rare.
Health or sound organization should be universal.
Genius should be the child of genius, and every child should be inspired; but now it is not to be predicted of any child, and nowhere is it pure.
These use their gifts to refine luxury, not to abolish it.
Genius is always ascetic; and piety, and love.
Appetite shows to the finer souls as a disease, and they find beauty in rites and bounds that resist it.
The man of talent affects to call his transgressions of the laws of the senses trivial and to count them nothing considered with his devotion to his art.
That never taught him lewdness, nor the love of wine, nor the wish to reap where he had not sowed.
His art is less for every deduction from his holiness, and less for every defect of common sense.
On him who scorned the world, as he said, the scorned world wreaks its revenge.
He that despiseth small things will perish by little and little.
One living after the maxims of this world and consistent and true to them, the other fired with all divine sentiments, yet grasping also at the pleasures of sense, without submitting to their law.
That is a grief we all feel, a knot we cannot untie.
Tasso's is no infrequent case in modern biography.
A man of genius, of an ardent temperament, reckless of physical laws, self-indulgent, becomes presently unfortunate, querulous, a "discomfortable cousin," a thorn to himself and to others.
Whilst something higher than prudence is active, he is admirable; when common sense is wanted, he is an encumbrance.
Yesterday, radiant with the light of an ideal world in which he lives, the first of men, and now oppressed by wants and by sickness, for which he must thank himself, none is so poor to do him reverence.
And who has not seen the tragedy of imprudent genius struggling for years with paltry pecuniary difficulties, at last sinking, chilled, exhausted and fruitless, like a giant slaughtered by pins?
Is it not better that a man should accept the first pains and mortifications of this sort, which nature is not slack in sending him, as hints that he must expect no other good than the just fruit of his own labor and self-denial?
Health, bread, climate, social position, have their importance, and he will give them their due.
Let him esteem Nature a perpetual counsellor, and her perfections the exact measure of our deviations.
Let him make the night night, and the day day.
Let him see that as much wisdom may be expended on a private economy as on an empire, and as much wisdom may be drawn from it.
The laws of the world are written out for him on every piece of money in his hand.
Iron, if kept at the ironmonger's, will rust; beer, if not brewed in the right state of the atmosphere, will sour; timber of ships will rot at sea, or if laid up high and dry, will strain, warp and dry-rot.
Money, if kept by us, yields no rent and is liable to loss; if invested, is liable to depreciation of the particular kind of stock.
Strike, says the smith, the iron is white.
Keep the rake, says the haymaker, as nigh the scythe as you can, and the cart as nigh the rake.
Our Yankee trade is reputed to be very much on the extreme of this prudence.
It takes bank notes,--good, bad, clean, ragged, and saves itself by the speed with which it passes them off.
Iron cannot rust, nor beer sour, nor timber rot, nor calicoes go out of fashion, nor money stocks depreciate, in the few swift moments in which the Yankee suffers any one of them to remain in his possession.
In skating over thin ice our safety is in our speed.
Let him learn a prudence of a higher strain.
Let him learn that everything in nature, even motes and feathers, go by law and not by luck, and that what he sows he reaps.
By diligence and self-command let him put the bread he eats at his own disposal, and not at that of others, that he may not stand in bitter and false relations to other men; for the best good of wealth is freedom.
Let him not make his fellow creatures wait.
How many words and promises are promises of conversation!
We must not try to write the laws of any one virtue, looking at that only.
Human nature loves no contradictions, but is symmetrical.
The prudence which secures an outward well-being is not to be studied by one set of men, whilst heroism and holiness are studied by another, but they are reconcilable.
Prudence concerns the present time, persons, property and existing forms.
Every violation of truth is not only a sort of suicide in the liar, but is a stab at the health of human society.
On the most profitable lie the course of events presently lays a destructive tax; whilst frankness proves to be the best tactics, for it invites frankness, puts the parties on a convenient footing and makes their business a friendship.
Trust men and they will be true to you; treat them greatly and they will show themselves great, though they make an exception in your favor to all their rules of trade.
So, in regard to disagreeable and formidable things, prudence does not consist in evasion or in flight, but in courage.
He who wishes to walk in the most peaceful parts of life with any serenity must screw himself up to resolution.
Let him front the object of his worst apprehension, and his stoutness will commonly make his fears groundless.
Entire self-possession may make a battle very little more dangerous to life than a match at foils or at football.
Examples are cited by soldiers of men who have seen the cannon pointed and the fire given to it, and who have stepped aside from the path of the ball.
The terrors of the storm are chiefly confined to the parlor and the cabin.
The drover, the sailor, buffets it all day, and his health renews itself at as vigorous a pulse under the sleet as under the sun of June.
In the occurrence of unpleasant things among neighbors, fear comes readily to heart and magnifies the consequence of the other party; but it is a bad counsellor.
Every man is actually weak and apparently strong.
To himself he seems weak; to others formidable.
You are afraid of Grim; but Grim also is afraid of you.
You are solicitous of the good will of the meanest person, uneasy at his ill will.
Far off, men swell, bully and threaten: bring them hand to hand, and they are a feeble folk.
It is a proverb that "courtesy costs nothing"; but calculation might come to value love for its profit.
Love is fabled to be blind, but kindness is necessary to perception; love is not a hood, but an eye-water.
What low, poor, paltry, hypocritical people an argument on religion will make of the pure and chosen souls.
Shuffle they will and crow, crook and hide, feign to confess here, only that they may brag and conquer there, and not a thought has enriched either party, and not an emotion of bravery, modesty, or hope.
So neither should you put yourself in a false position to your contemporaries by indulging a vein of hostility and bitterness.
So at least shall you get an adequate deliverance.
The natural emotions of the soul are so much better than the voluntary ones that you will never do yourself justice in dispute.
The thought is not then taken hold of by the right handle, does not show itself proportioned and in its true bearings, but bears extorted, hoarse, and half witness.
But assume a consent and it shall presently be granted, since really and underneath their all external diversities, all men are of one heart and mind.
Wisdom will never let us stand with any man or men on an unfriendly footing.
We refuse sympathy and intimacy with people, as if we waited for some better sympathy and intimacy to come.
Life wastes itself whilst we are preparing to live.
Our friends and fellow-workers die off from us.
Scarcely can we say we see new men, new women, approaching us.
We are too old to regard fashion, too old to expect patronage of any greater or more powerful.
Undoubtedly we can easily pick faults in our company, can easily whisper names prouder and that tickle the fancy more.
Every man's imagination hath its friends; and pleasant would life be with such companions.
But if you cannot have them on good mutual terms, you cannot have them.
If not the Deity but our ambition hews and shapes the new relations, their virtue escapes, as strawberries lose their flavor in garden beds.
Thus truth, frankness, courage, love, humility, and all the virtues range themselves on the side of prudence, or the art of securing a present well-being.
The eye is the first circle; the horizon which it forms is the second; and throughout nature this primary picture is repeated without end.
It is the highest emblem in the cipher of the world.
We are all our lifetime reading the copious sense of this first of forms.
One moral we have already deduced in considering the circular or compensatory character of every human action.
Another analogy we shall now trace, that every action admits of being outdone.
Our globe seen by God is a transparent law, not a mass of facts.
The law dissolves the fact and holds its fluid.
Our culture is the predominance of an idea which draws after it all this train of cities and institutions.
Let us rise into another idea; they will disappear.
For the genius that created it creates now somewhat else.
The new continents are built out of the ruins of an old planet; the new races fed out of the decomposition of the foregoing.
You admire this tower of granite, weathering the hurts of so many ages.
Yet a little waving hand built this huge wall, and that which builds is better than that which is built.
The hand that built can topple it down much faster.
Better than the hand and nimbler was the invisible thought which wrought through it; and thus ever, behind the coarse effect, is a fine cause, which, being narrowly seen, is itself the effect of a finer cause.
Everything looks permanent until its secret is known.
A rich estate appears to women and children a firm and lasting fact; to a merchant, one easily created out of any materials, and easily lost.
An orchard, good tillage, good grounds, seem a fixture, like a gold mine, or a river, to a citizen; but to a large farmer, not much more fixed than the state of the crop.
Nature looks provokingly stable and secular, but it has a cause like all the rest; and when once I comprehend that, will these fields stretch so immovably wide, these leaves hang so individually considerable?
Moons are no more bounds to spiritual power than bat-balls.
Sturdy and defying though he look, he has a helm which he obeys, which is the idea after which all his facts are classified.
He can only be reformed by showing him a new idea which commands his own.
The extent to which this generation of circles, wheel without wheel, will go, depends on the force or truth of the individual soul.
For it is the inert effort of each thought, having formed itself into a circular wave of circumstance, as for instance an empire, rules of an art, a local usage, a religious rite, to heap itself on that ridge and to solidify and hem in the life.
But if the soul is quick and strong it bursts over that boundary on all sides and expands another orbit on the great deep, which also runs up into a high wave, with attempt again to stop and to bind.
Every ultimate fact is only the first of a new series.
Every general law only a particular fact of some more general law presently to disclose itself.
There is no outside, no inclosing wall, no circumference to us.
The man finishes his story,--how good! how final! how it puts a new face on all things!
Lo, on the other side rises also a man and draws a circle around the circle we had just pronounced the outline of the sphere.
Then already is our first speaker not man, but only a first speaker.
His only redress is forthwith to draw a circle outside of his antagonist.
The result of to-day, which haunts the mind and cannot be escaped will presently be abridged into a word, and the principle that seemed to explain nature will itself be included as one example of a bolder generalization.
In the thought of to-morrow there is a power to upheave all thy creed, all the creeds, all the literatures of the nations, and marshal thee to a heaven which no epic dream has yet depicted.
Every man is not so much a workman in the world as he is a suggestion of that he should be.
Step by step we scale this mysterious ladder; the steps are actions, the new prospect is power.
Every several result is threatened and judged by that which follows.
Every one seems to be contradicted by the new; it is only limited by the new.
The new statement is always hated by the old, and, to those dwelling in the old, comes like an abyss of scepticism.
But the eye soon gets wonted to it, for the eye and it are effects of one cause; then its innocency and benefit appear, and presently, all its energy spent, it pales and dwindles before the revelation of the new hour.
Resist it not; it goes to refine and raise thy theory of matter just as much.
There are no fixtures to men, if we appeal to consciousness.
Every man supposes himself not to be fully understood; and if there is any truth in him, if he rests at last on the divine soul, I see not how it can be otherwise.
The last chamber, the last closet, he must feel was never opened; there is always a residuum unknown, unanalyzable.
That is, every man believes that he has a greater possibility.
To-day I am full of thoughts and can write what I please.
I see no reason why I should not have the same thought, the same power of expression, to-morrow.
What I write, whilst I write it, seems the most natural thing in the world: but yesterday I saw a dreary vacuity in this direction in which now I see so much; and a month hence, I doubt not, I shall wonder who he was that wrote so many continuous pages.
Alas for this infirm faith, this will not strenuous, this vast ebb of a vast flow!
I am God in nature; I am a weed by the wall.
We thirst for approbation, yet cannot forgive the approver.
The sweet of nature is love; yet if I have a friend I am tormented by my imperfections.
A man's growth is seen in the successive choirs of his friends.
For every friend whom he loses for truth, he gains a better.
I thought as I walked in the woods and mused on any friends, why should I play with them this game of idolatry?
I know and see too well, when not voluntarily blind, the speedy limits of persons called high and worthy.
Rich, noble and great they are by the liberality of our speech, but truth is sad.
O blessed Spirit, whom I forsake for these, they are not thee!
Every personal consideration that we allow costs us heavenly state.
We sell the thrones of angels for a short and turbulent pleasure.
Men cease to interest us when we find their limitations.
As soon as you once come up with a man's limitations, it is all over with him.
Has he talents? has he enterprises? has he knowledge?
Infinitely alluring and attractive was he to you yesterday, a great hope, a sea to swim in; now, you have found his shores, found it a pond, and you care not if you never see it again.
Each new step we take in thought reconciles twenty seemingly discordant facts, as expressions of one law.
A wise man will see that Aristotle platonizes.
By going one step farther back in thought, discordant opinions are reconciled by being seen to be two extremes of one principle, and we can never go so far back as to preclude a still higher vision.
Beware when the great God lets loose a thinker on this planet.
It is as when a conflagration has broken out in a great city, and no man knows what is safe, or where it will end.
There is not a piece of science but its flank may be turned to-morrow; there is not any literary reputation, not the so-called eternal names of fame, that may not be revised and condemned.
The very hopes of man, the thoughts of his heart, the religion of nations, the manners and morals of mankind are all at the mercy of a new generalization.
Generalization is always a new influx of the divinity into the mind.
Valor consists in the power of self-recovery, so that a man cannot have his flank turned, cannot be out-generalled, but put him where you will, he stands.
We learn first to play with it academically, as the magnet was once a toy.
Then we see in the heyday of youth and poetry that it may be true, that it is true in gleams and fragments.
Then, its countenance waxes stern and grand, and we see that it must be true.
It now shows itself ethical and practical.
We learn that God is; that he is in me; and that all things are shadows of him.
Much more obviously is history and the state of the world at any one time directly dependent on the intellectual classification then existing in the minds of men.
The things which are dear to men at this hour are so on account of the ideas which have emerged on their mental horizon, and which cause the present order of things, as a tree bears its apples.
A new degree of culture would instantly revolutionize the entire system of human pursuits.
To-morrow you shall find them stooping under the old pack-saddles.
Yet let us enjoy the cloven flame whilst it glows on our walls.
When each new speaker strikes a new light, emancipates us from the oppression of the last speaker to oppress us with the greatness and exclusiveness of his own thought, then yields us to another redeemer, we seem to recover our rights, to become men.
O, what truths profound and executable only in ages and orbs, are supposed in the announcement of every truth!
In common hours, society sits cold and statuesque.
We all stand waiting, empty,--knowing, possibly, that we can be full, surrounded by mighty symbols which are not symbols to us, but prose and trivial toys.
Then cometh the god and converts the statues into fiery men, and by a flash of his eye burns up the veil which shrouded all things, and the meaning of the very furniture, of cup and saucer, of chair and clock and tester, is manifest.
The facts which loomed so large in the fogs of yesterday,--property, climate, breeding, personal beauty and the like, have strangely changed their proportions.
All that we reckoned settled shakes and rattles; and literatures, cities, climates, religions, leave their foundations and dance before our eyes.
And yet here again see the swift circumscription!
Good as is discourse, silence is better, and shames it.
The length of the discourse indicates the distance of thought betwixt the speaker and the hearer.
If they were at a perfect understanding in any part, no words would be necessary thereon.
If at one in all parts, no words would be suffered.
The use of literature is to afford us a platform whence we may command a view of our present life, a purchase by which we may move it.
The field cannot be well seen from within the field.
The astronomer must have his diameter of the earth's orbit as a base to find the parallax of any star.
All the argument and all the wisdom is not in the encyclopædia, or the treatise on metaphysics, or the Body of Divinity, but in the sonnet or the play.
In my daily work I incline to repeat my old steps, and do not believe in remedial force, in the power of change and reform.
He smites and arouses me with his shrill tones, breaks up my whole chain of habits, and I open my eye on my own possibilities.
He claps wings to the sides of all the solid old lumber of the world, and I am capable once more of choosing a straight path in theory and practice.
We have the same need to command a view of the religion of the world.
We can never see Christianity from the catechism:--from the pastures, from a boat in the pond, from amidst the songs of wood-birds we possibly may.
Cleansed by the elemental light and wind, steeped in the sea of beautiful forms which the field offers us, we may chance to cast a right glance back upon biography.
The natural world may be conceived of as a system of concentric circles, and we now and then detect in nature slight dislocations which apprize us that this surface on which we now stand is not fixed, but sliding.
Yet is that statement approximate also, and not final.
Not through subtle subterranean channels need friend and fact be drawn to their counterpart, but, rightly considered, these things proceed from the eternal generation of the soul.
Cause and effect are two sides of one fact.
The same law of eternal procession ranges all that we call the virtues, and extinguishes each in the light of a better.
The great man will not be prudent in the popular sense; all his prudence will be so much deduction from his grandeur.
But it behooves each to see, when he sacrifices prudence, to what god he devotes it; if to ease and pleasure, he had better be prudent still; if to a great trust, he can well spare his mule and panniers who has a winged chariot instead.
Geoffrey draws on his boots to go through the woods, that his feet may be safer from the bite of snakes; Aaron never thinks of such a peril.
In many years neither is harmed by such an accident.
Yet it seems to me that with every precaution you take against such an evil you put yourself into the power of the evil.
I suppose that the highest prudence is the lowest prudence.
Is this too sudden a rushing from the centre to the verge of our orbit?
Think how many times we shall fall back into pitiful calculations before we take up our rest in the great sentiment, or make the verge of to-day the new centre.
Besides, your bravest sentiment is familiar to the humblest men.
The poor and the low have their way of expressing the last facts of philosophy as well as you. "Blessed be nothing" and "The worse things are, the better they are" are proverbs which express the transcendentalism of common life.
One man's justice is another's injustice; one man's beauty another's ugliness; one man's wisdom another's folly; as one beholds the same objects from a higher point of view.
One man thinks justice consists in paying debts, and has no measure in his abhorrence of another who is very remiss in this duty and makes the creditor wait tediously.
But that second man has his own way of looking at things; asks himself which debt must I pay first, the debt to the rich, or the debt to the poor? the debt of money, or the debt of thought to mankind, of genius to nature?
For you, O broker, there is no other principle but arithmetic.
For me, commerce is of trivial import; love, faith, truth of character, the aspiration of man, these are sacred; nor can I detach one duty, like you, from all other duties, and concentrate my forces mechanically on the payment of moneys.
Let me live onward; you shall find that, though slower, the progress of my character will liquidate all these debts without injustice to higher claims.
If a man should dedicate himself to the payment of notes, would not this be injustice?
And are all claims on him to be postponed to a landlord's or a banker's?
There is no virtue which is final; all are initial.
The virtues of society are vices of the saint.
The terror of reform is the discovery that we must cast away our virtues, or what we have always esteemed such, into the same pit that has consumed our grosser vices.
It is the highest power of divine moments that they abolish our contritions also.
I accuse myself of sloth and unprofitableness day by day; but when these waves of God flow into me I no longer reckon lost time.
But lest I should mislead any when I have my own head and obey my whims, let me remind the reader that I am only an experimenter.
Do not set the least value on what I do, or the least discredit on what I do not, as if I pretended to settle anything as true or false.
No facts are to me sacred; none are profane; I simply experiment, an endless seeker with no Past at my back.
Yet this incessant movement and progression which all things partake could never become sensible to us but by contrast to some principle of fixture or stability in the soul.
Whilst the eternal generation of circles proceeds, the eternal generator abides.
That central life is somewhat superior to creation, superior to knowledge and thought, and contains all its circles.
For ever it labors to create a life and thought as large and excellent as itself; but in vain; for that which is made instructs how to make a better.
Thus there is no sleep, no pause, no preservation, but all things renew, germinate and spring.
Why should we import rags and relics into the new hour?
Nature abhors the old, and old age seems the only disease: all others run into this one.
We call it by many names,--fever, intemperance, insanity, stupidity and crime: they are all forms of old age: they are rest, conservatism, appropriation, inertia; not newness, not the way onward.
Whilst we converse with what is above us, we do not grow old, but grow young.
Infancy, youth, receptive, aspiring, with religious eye looking upward, counts itself nothing and abandons itself to the instruction flowing from all sides.
But the man and woman of seventy assume to know all; throw up their hope; renounce aspiration; accept the actual for the necessary and talk down to the young.
Let them then become organs of the Holy Ghost; let them be lovers; let them behold truth; and their eyes are uplifted, their wrinkles smoothed, they are perfumed again with hope and power.
This old age ought not to creep on a human mind.
In nature every moment is new; the past is always swallowed and forgotten; the coming only is sacred.
Nothing is secure but life, transition, the energizing spirit.
No love can be bound by oath or covenant to secure it against a higher love.
No truth so sublime but it may be trivial to-morrow in the light of new thoughts.
People wish to be settled: only as far as they are unsettled is there any hope for them.
We do not guess to-day the mood, the pleasure, the power of to-morrow, when we are building up our being.
Of lower states,--of acts of routine and sense, we can tell somewhat, but the masterpieces of God, the total growths and universal movements of the soul, he hideth; they are incalculable.
The new position of the advancing man has all the powers of the old, yet has them all new.
It carries in its bosom all the energies of the past, yet is itself an exhalation of the morning.
I cast away in this new moment all my once hoarded knowledge, as vacant and vain.
Now for the first time seem I to know any thing rightly.
The simplest words,--we do not know what they mean except when we love and aspire.
The difference between talents and character is adroitness to keep the old and trodden round, and power and courage to make a new road to new and better goals.
Character makes an overpowering present, a cheerful, determined hour, which fortifies all the company by making them see that much is possible and excellent that was not thought of.
Character dulls the impression of particular events.
When we see the conqueror we do not think much of any one battle or success.
We see that we had exaggerated the difficulty.
The great man is not convulsible or tormentable.
He is so much that events pass over him without much impression.
People say sometimes, "See what I have overcome; see how cheerful I am; see how completely I have triumphed over these black events." Not if they still remind me of the black event,--they have not yet conquered.
Is it conquest to be a gay and decorated sepulchre, or a half-crazed widow, hysterically laughing?
True conquest is the causing the black event to fade and disappear as an early cloud of insignificant result in a history so large and advancing.
Nothing great was ever achieved without enthusiasm.
For the like reason they ask the aid of wild passions, as in the gaming and war, ape in some manner these flames and generosities of the heart.
The public games of Greece were athletic and intellectual contests of various kinds.
There were four of importance: the Olympic, held every four years; the Pythian, held every third Olympic year; and the Nemean and Isthmian, held alternate years between the Olympic periods.
These great national festivals exercised a strong influence in Greece.
They were a secure bond of union between the numerous independent states and did much to help the nation to repel its foreign invaders.
In Greece the accomplished athlete was reverenced almost as a god, and cases have been recorded where altars were erected and sacrifices made in his honor.
In southern France during the eleventh century, wandering poets went from castle to castle reciting or singing love-songs, composed in the old Provençal dialect, a sort of vulgarized Latin.
The life in the great feudal chateaux was so dull that the lords and ladies seized with avidity any amusement which promised to while away an idle hour.
The troubadours were made much of and became a strong element in the development of the Southern spirit.
So-called Courts of Love were formed where questions of an amorous nature were discussed in all their bearings; learned opinions were expressed on the most trivial matters, and offenses were tried.
Polaris is now the nearest conspicuous star to the north pole of the celestial equator.
An example of this is the transformation from the hoof of a horse through the cloven hoofs of the cow to the eventual development of highly expert fingers in the monkey and man.
Emerson assumed the doctrine of evolution to be sufficiently established by the anatomical evidence of gradual development.
In his own words: "Man is no up-start in the creation.
His limbs are only a more exquisite organization--say rather the finish--of the rudimental forms that have been already sweeping the sea and creeping in the mud.
The brother of his hand is even now cleaving the arctic sea in the fin of the whale, and innumerable ages since was pawing the marsh in the flipper of the saurian." A view afterwards condensed into his memorable couplet:
The original saying of Epictetus is as follows: "Every thing has two handles, the one by which it may be borne, the other by which it may not.
It is also ascribed to Pythagoras, Chilo, Thales, Cleobulus, Bias, and Socrates; also to Phemonië, a mythical Greek poetess of the ante-Homeric period.
Juvenal (Satire XI. 27) says that this precept descended from heaven. "Know thyself" and "Nothing too much" were inscribed upon the Delphic oracle.
"Know then thyself, presume not God to scan; The proper study of mankind is man."
The work he is best known by is the exhaustive "Essay on the Human Understanding," in which he combated the theory of Descartes, that every man has certain "innate ideas." The innate-idea theory was first proved by the philosopher Descartes in this way.
Descartes began his speculations from a standpoint of absolute doubt.
Then he said, "I think, therefore I am," and from this formula he built up a number of ideas innate to the human mind, ideas which we cannot but hold.
He occupied high public offices, but in 1621 was convicted of taking bribes in his office of Lord Chancellor.
He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to imprisonment and a fine of forty thousand pounds.
Both these sentences were remitted, however.
In the seventeenth century, judicial corruption was so common that Bacon's offence was not considered so gross as it would now be.
As a philosopher Bacon's rank has been much disputed.
While some claim that to his improved method of studying nature are chiefly to be attributed the prodigious strides taken by modern science, others deny him all merit in this respect.
The thirteenth century was the age when the national assemblies of most European countries were putting on their definite shape.
These in most countries were three--nobles, clergy, and commons, the commons being the third estate.
Men with a mania for collecting rare and beautiful books.
Here, for instance, at once the thought comes: "Is it not perhaps possible that the transcendent genius of Shakespeare has been rather noxious than beneficent in its influence on the mind of the world?
Chaucer's chief work is the "Canterbury Tales," a series of stories told by pilgrims traveling in company to Canterbury.
Coleridge, the poet, wrote of Chaucer: "I take unceasing delight in Chaucer; his manly cheerfulness is especially delicious to me in my old age.
How exquisitely tender he is, yet how free from the least touch of sickly melancholy or morbid drooping." Chaucer's poetry is above all things fresh.
It breathes of the morning of literature.
Like Homer he had at his command all the riches of a new language undefiled by usage from which to choose.
"Dan Chaucer, well of English undefyled, On Fame's eternall beadroll worthie to be fyled."
An eminent English patriot and satirist.
As a writer he is chiefly known by his "Rehearsal Transposed," written in answer to a fanatical defender of absolute power.
When a young man he was assistant to the poet Milton, who was then Latin secretary to Oliver Cromwell.
Marvell's wit and distinguished abilities rendered him formidable to the corrupt administration of Charles II., who attempted without success to buy his friendship.
Early in life he wrote almost entirely for the stage and achieved great success.
In the latter part of his life, however, according to Macaulay, he "turned his powers in a new direction with success the most splendid and decisive.
The first rank in poetry was beyond his reach, but he secured the most honorable place in the second....
One of the most illustrious philosophers of all time.
Probably no other philosopher has contributed so much as Plato to the moral and intellectual training of the human race.
This pre-eminence is due not solely to his transcendent intellect, but also in no small measure to his poetic power and to that unrivaled grace of style which led the ancients to say that if Jove should speak Greek he would speak like Plato.
He was a remarkable example of that universal culture of body and mind which characterized the last period of ancient Greece.
The region of pure light and fire; the ninth heaven of ancient astronomy.
"The deep-domed empyrean Rings to the roar of an angel onset."
A great English philosopher and mathematician.
Uncultivated, without natural advantages.
The ancient priesthood of the Britons in Cæsar's time.
They had immense power among these primitive peoples.
They were the judges as well as the priests and decided all questions.
Berserker was a redoubtable hero in Scandinavian mythology, the grandson of the eight-handed Starkodder and the beautiful Alfhilde.
He had twelve sons who inherited the wild-battle frenzy, or berserker rage.
The sagas, the great Scandinavian epics, are full of stories of heroes who are seized with this fierce longing for battle, murder, and sudden death.
When he ascended the throne his country was in a deplorable condition from the repeated inroads of northern invaders.
He eventually drove them out and established a secure government.
England owes much to the efforts of Alfred.
He appears to have been the first to understand the theory of the equation of time.
One of the greatest astronomers that any age or nation has produced.
Brought up to the profession of music, it was not until he was thirty years old that he turned his attention to astronomy.
By rigid economy he obtained a telescope, and in 1781 discovered the planet Uranus.
This great discovery gave him great fame and other substantial advantages.
He was made private astronomer to the king and received a pension.
The word seems to have been applied by Portuguese sailors and traders on the west coast of Africa to objects worshiped by the natives, which were regarded as charms or talismans.
In Cervantes' "Don Quixote," Sancho Panza, the squire to the "knight of the metaphysical countenance," tells a story of a gentleman who had asked a countryman to dine with him.
The tides are caused by the attraction of the moon and the sun.
The attraction of the moon for the water nearest the moon is somewhat greater than the attraction of the earth's center.
One of the most popular of English poets.
His poem "The Task" was probably more read in his day than any poem of equal length in the language.
The most illustrious name in German literature; a great poet, dramatist, novelist, philosopher, and critic.
The Germans regard Goethe with the same veneration we accord to Shakespeare.
By many considered the greatest of modern English poets.
His descriptions of the ever-varying moods of nature are the most exquisite in the language.
A famous English essayist, historian, and speculative philosopher.
It is scarcely too much to say that no other author of this century has exerted a greater influence not merely upon the literature but upon the mind of the English nation than Carlyle.
Emerson was an intimate friend of Carlyle, and during the greater part of his life maintained a correspondence with the great Englishman.
The author of the "Essay on Criticism," "Rape of the Lock," the "Essay on Man," and other famous poems.
Pope possessed little originality or creative imagination, but he had a vivid sense of the beautiful and an exquisite taste.
One of the eminent writers of the eighteenth century.
One of the most distinguished of English historians.
This old proverb is quoted by Sophocles, (Fragm.
In punishment for this Jupiter chained him to a rock and set an eagle to prey upon his liver.
Some unknown and terrible danger threatened Jupiter, the secret of averting which only Prometheus knew.
Enamored of Tithonus, she persuaded Jupiter to grant him immortality, but forgot to ask for him immortal youth.
His mother Thetis, to render him invulnerable, plunged him into the waters of the Styx.
The heel by which she held him was not washed by the waters and remained vulnerable.
Having slain a dragon, he bathed in its blood and became covered with an invulnerable horny hide, only one small spot between his shoulders which was covered by a leaf remaining vulnerable.
Achilles slew Hector and, lashing him to his chariot with the belt which Ajax had given Hector, dragged him round the walls of Troy.
In accordance with this advice he cast into the sea an emerald ring which he considered his rarest treasure.
A few days later a fisherman presented the monarch with a large fish inside of which the ring was found.
Holmes writes of Emerson: "Jesus was for him a divine manifestation, but only as other great human souls have been in all ages and are to-day.
He was willing to be called a Christian just as he was willing to be called a Platonist....
"O mighty-mouth'd inventor of harmonies, O skill'd to sing of Time or Eternity, God-gifted organ-voice of England, Milton, a name to resound for ages."--TENNYSON.
This is the theme of the present essay, and is a lesson which Emerson is never tired of teaching.
"Self-respect is the early form in which greatness appears....
Follow the path your genius traces like the galaxy of heaven for you to walk in."
"What stronger breastplate than a heart untainted?
The Alexandrian line consists of twelve syllables (iambic hexameter).
Neither the acrostic nor the Alexandrine has the property assigned to it here.
A palindrame reads the same forward as backward, as:
"Madam, I'm Adam"; "Signa te signa; temere me tangis et angis";
The reference is presumably to Samuel Adams (1722-1803), a popular leader and orator in the cause of American freedom.
He was a member of the Continental Congress and a signer of the Declaration of Independence.
"I the heir of all the ages, in the foremost files of time."
Woden or Odin was the chief god of Scandinavian mythology.
Thor, his elder son, was the god of thunder.
French theologian and Protestant reformer.
"Vain, very vain, my weary search to find That bliss which only centers in the mind....
He became Lord Chancellor under Elizabeth.
The meridian of the Royal Observatory at Greenwich, near London, is the prime meridian for reckoning the longitude of the world.
The nautical almanac is a publication containing astronomical data for the use of navigators and astronomers.
What is the name of the corresponding publication of the U.S.
Next after Shakespeare and Plato he is the author most frequently mentioned by Emerson.
He was defeated in the battle of Waterloo by the Duke of Wellington, and died in exile on the isle of St.
He was the agitator, the destroyer of prescription, the internal improver, the liberal, the radical, the inventor of means, the opener of doors and markets, the subverter of monopoly and abuse....
He had the virtues of the masses of his constituents: he had also their vices.
In Roman mythology Fortune, the goddess of fortune or chance, is represented as standing on a ball or wheel.
The walk opposite Emerson's house on the 'Great Road' to Boston was a favorite winter walk for Concord people.
In classic mythology, the nine sisters who presided over music, poetry, art, and science.
See on what a high plane Emerson places this relation of friendship.
In 1840 he wrote in a letter: "I am a worshiper of friendship, and cannot find any other good equal to it.
One who took part in the great Greek games held every four years on the plain of Olympia.
The racing, wrestling and other contests of strength and skill were accompanied by sacrifices to the gods, processions, and banquets.
There was a sense of dignity and almost of worship about the games.
Emerson felt that this same law applied to nature.
The word here means simply two-faced, without the idea of deceit usually attached to it.
In Roman mythology, Janus, the doorkeeper of heaven was the protector of doors and gateways and the patron of the beginning and end of undertakings.
He was the god of the rising and setting of the sun, and was represented with two faces, one looking to the east and the other to the west.
This saying of Mahomet's was the only motto prefixed to the essay in the first edition.
In later editions, Emerson prefixed, according to his custom, some original lines;
The dramatists who preceded Shakespeare.
Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher were two dramatists of the Elizabethan age.
Favorite names for heroes among the dramatists.
Rodrigo Diaz de Bivar, known usually by the title of the Cid, was the national hero of Spain, famous for his exploits against the Moors.
The first, third and fourth are names of plays by Beaumont and Fletcher.
According to Greek mythology, the crown of Adriadne was, for her beauty and her sufferings, put among the stars.
Carlyle was a great admirer of heroes, asserting that history is the biography of great men.
The battle referred to was fought in 1632 and in it the Swedes under Gustavus Adolphus gained a great victory over vastly superior numbers.
The stern and severe philosophy taught by the Greek philosopher Zeno; he taught that men should always seek virtue and be indifferent to pleasure and happiness.
"So nigh is grandeur to our dust, So near is God to man, When Duty whispers low, 'Thou must,' The youth replies, 'I can.'"
An Egyptian philosopher who taught in Rome during the third century.
The passage, like many which Emerson quotes, is rendered inexactly.
The Prince says to Poins: "Indeed these humble considerations make me out of love with my greatness.
Ibn Hankul, an Arabian geographer and traveler of the tenth century.
What does Emerson mean by this sentence?
An English statesman and author who was beheaded in 1535 on a charge of high treason.
The incident to which Emerson refers is one which showed his "pleasant wit" undisturbed by the prospect of death.
Any rigid Sunday laws or religious regulations.
Chevalier de Bayard was a French gentleman of the fifteenth century.
The Colossus of Rhodes was a gigantic statue--over a hundred feet in height--of the Rhodian sun god.
A Greek poet of the seventh century before Christ.
Such was the advice given to the Emerson boys by their aunt, Miss.
Mary Moody Emerson: "Scorn trifles, lift your aims; do what you are afraid to do; sublimity of character must come from sublimity of motive." Upon her monument are inscribed Emerson's words about her: "She gave high counsels.
A Greek general and statesman of the fourth century before Christ who advised the Athenians to make peace with Philip of Macedon.
Elijah Lovejoy, a Presbyterian clergyman of Maine who published a periodical against slavery.
In 1837 an Illinois mob demanded his printing press, which he refused to give up.
Thou wilt never raise thine head From the green that folds thy grave-- Let them rave."
The essays in this volume, like those in the first, were, for the most part, made up of Emerson's lectures, rearranged and corrected.
Architecture was a subject in which Emerson was deeply interested.
The Middle Ages in Europe during which the feudal system prevailed.
Why does Emerson regard this as of such importance?
A famous sultan of Egypt and Syria who lived in the twelfth century.
Alexander, King of Macedon, surnamed the Great.
Is this the order in which you would expect these words to occur?
Orders or classes of people with regard to political rights and powers.
In England the Herald's College, or College of Arms, is a royal corporation the chief business of which is to grant armorial bearings, or coats of arms, and to trace and preserve genealogies.
Host; it came to have this meaning from an incident in the story of Amphitryon, a character in Greek legend.
At one time Jupiter assumed the form of Amphitryon and gave a banquet.
The real Amphitryon came in and asserted that he was master of the house.
According to Greek legend, Circe was a beautiful enchantress.
In ancient mythology, the Sibyls were certain women who possessed the power of prophecy.
In Greek mythology, the leader of the satyrs.
It was a part of Emerson's philosophic faith that there is no such thing as giving,--everything that belongs to a man or that he ought to have, will come to him.
But in the ordinarily accepted sense of the word, Emerson was a gracious giver and receiver.
In his family the old New England custom of New Year's presents was kept up to his last days.
We can hardly imagine Emerson's asking a gift or favor.
Under the Hebrew law, a sacrifice or offering for sin.
In the Greek legend, Epimetheus gives this advice to his brother Prometheus.
Here used in the sense of wealthy givers.
How instantly do I beg of his holy compassion that I may never owe a real thanks to anyone.
O happy liberty in which I have thus far lived!
When Emerson, in his old age, had his house injured by fire, his friends contributed funds to repair it and to send him to England.
In the years which followed, he thought more deeply on the subject and, according to his custom, made notes about it and entries in his journals.
The plan of it, however, had been long in his mind: In 1840 he wrote in his journal: "I think I must do these eyes of mine the justice to write a new chapter on Nature.
This delight we all take in every show of night or day or field or forest or sea or city, down to the lowest particulars, is not without sequel, though we be as yet only wishers and gazers, not at all knowing what we want.
The passage in Emerson's journal is hardly less beautiful.
Halcyon days, ones of peace and tranquillity; anciently, days of calm weather in mid-winter, when the halcyon, or kingfisher, was supposed to brood.
Calm, dry, hazy weather which comes in the autumn in America.
"And the countless leaves of the pines are strings Tuned to the lay the wood-god sings."
Explain the meaning of these words, in the Roman Catholic Church.
A stringed instrument from which sound is drawn by the passing of the wind over its strings.
In Greek mythology, a sea god who had the power of assuming different shapes.
The system of geography and astronomy taught in the second century by Ptolemy of Alexandria; it was accepted till the sixteenth century, when the Copernican system was established.
Emerson deducts from nature the doctrine of evolution.
Give an account of Benjamin Franklin, the famous American scientist and patriot.
A widely scattered plant, called self-heal, because a decoction of its leaves and stems was, and to some extent is, valued as an application to wounds.
These essays were first delivered as lectures in Boston in the winter of 1845, and were repeated two years later before English audiences.
They must have been especially interesting to those Englishmen who had, seven years before, heard Emerson's friend, Carlyle, deliver his six lectures on great men whom he selected as representative ones.
Both Emerson and Carlyle reverenced the great English poet as "the master of mankind." Even in serious New England, the plays of Shakespeare were found upon the bookshelf beside religious tracts and doctrinal treatises.
There the boy Emerson found them and learned to love them, and the man Emerson loved them but the more.
It was as a record of personal experiences that he wrote in his journal: "Shakespeare fills us with wonder the first time we approach him.
We go away, and work and think, for years, and come again,--he astonishes us anew.
Then, having drank deeply and saturated us with his genius, we lose sight of him for another period of years.
By and by we return, and there he stands immeasurable as at first.
We have grown wiser, but only that we should see him wiser than ever.
He resembles a high mountain which the traveler sees in the morning and thinks he shall quickly near it and pass it and leave it behind.
But he journeys all day till noon, till night.
It is impossible to appreciate or enjoy this essay without having some clear general information about the condition of the English people and English literature in the glorious Elizabethan age in which Shakespeare lived.
For an account of these dramatists consult a text book on English literature.
The English drama seems to have begun in the Middle Ages with what were called Miracle plays, which were scenes from Bible history; about the same time were performed the Mystery plays, which dramatized the lives of saints.
These were followed by the Moralities, plays in which were personified abstract virtues and vices.
The first step in the creation of the regular drama was taken by Heywood, who composed some farcical plays called Interludes.
The people of the sixteenth century were fond of pageants, shows in which classical personages were introduced, and Masques, which gradually developed from pageants into dramas accompanied with music.
About the middle of the sixteenth century, rose the English drama,--comedy, tragedy, and historical plays.
The chief among the group of dramatists who attained fame before Shakespeare began to write were Kyd, Marlowe, Greene, and Peele.
A poetical version of the legendary history of Britain, by Layamon.
A British King of the sixth century, around whose life and deeds so many legends have grown up that some historians say he, too, was a myth.
Among the dramas popular in Shakespeare's day which he retouched or rewrote are the historical plays.
A Persian poet, supposed to have lived in the thirteenth century.
Taine, the French critic, says on this subject: "Chaucer was capable of seeking out in the old common forest of the Middle Ages, stories and legends, to replant them in his own soil and make them send out new shoots....
He has the right and power of copying and translating because by dint of retouching he impresses ... his original work.
William Caxton, the English author, more famous as the first English printer, was not born until after Chaucer's death.
A Sicilian poet and historian of the thirteenth century.
An Italian novelist and poet of the fourteenth century.
The poets of Provençe, a province of the southeastern part of France.
John Gower was an English poet, Chaucer's contemporary and friend; the two poets went to the same sources for poetic materials, but Chaucer made no such use of Gower's works as we would infer from this passage.
What legislative body assembles at Westminster Palace, London?
Of this great English poet and prose writer of the seventeenth century, Emerson says: "No man can be named whose mind still acts on the cultivated intellect of England and America with an energy comparable to that of Milton.
An appointed form of worship used in a Christian church,--here, specifically, the service of the Episcopal church.
Indian sage to whom were ascribed some fables.
The poem in which the Greek, poet, Homer, describes the siege and fall of Troy.
The Shakespeare Society, founded in 1841, was dissolved in 1853.
Walter Devereux was a brave English gentleman whom Elizabeth made Earl of Essex in 1572.
The English dynasty of sovereigns descended on the male side from Owen Tudor.
He was indeed honest and of an open and free nature: had an excellent fancy; brave notions and gentle expressions: wherein he flowed with that facility that sometimes it was necessary he should be stopped....
His wit was in his own power; would the rule of it had been so, too.
Many times he fell into those things could not escape laughter....
But he redeemed his vices with his virtues.
The persons enumerated were all people of note of the seventeenth century.
Sir Philip Sidney, Earl of Essex, Lord Bacon, Sir Walter Raleigh, John Milton, Sir Henry Vane, Isaac Walton, Dr.
John Donne, Abraham Cowley, Charles Cotton, John Pym, and John Hales were Englishmen, scholars, statesmen, and authors.
Emerson said to a friend: "I see you are one of the happy mortals who are capable of being carried away by an actor of Shakespeare.
In Greek mythology, the Cyclops were a race of giants.
The word here has rather the force of euphemism, an entirely different word.
A Greek philosopher of the third century before Christ.
As a northerner, Emerson naturally felt that the advantage and superiority were with his own section.
Emerson here refers to the military operations carried on from 1808 to 1814 in Portugal, Spain, and southern France against the French, by the British, Spanish, and Portuguese forces commanded by Wellington.
Samuel Johnson was an eminent English scholar of the eighteenth century.
In this, as in many other instances, Emerson quotes from his memory instead of from the book.
Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach is a grand duchy of Germany.
The grand duke referred to was Charles Augustus, who died in 1828.
Emerson always insisted that morals and intellect should be united.
A play by the German poet Goethe, founded on the belief that the imprisonment of Tasso was due to his aspiration to the hand of Leonora d'Este, sister of the duke of Ferrara.
Emerson suggests that punctuality and regard for a promise are two of these.
Unlike most of the other essays in the volume, no earlier form of it exists, and it was probably not delivered first as a lecture.
Compensation illustrates one property of a circle, which always returns to the point where it began, but it is no less true that around every circle another can be drawn....
Emerson followed his own counsel; he always keeps a reserve of power.
A celebrated father of the Latin church, who flourished in the fourth century.
The greatest development of the art of sculpture that the world has ever known was that which took place in Greece, with Athens as the center, in the fifth century before Christ.
In literature--in drama, philosophy and history--Greece attained an excellence as signal as in art.
Emerson as a scholar, felt that the literature of Greece was more permanent than its art.
Tell the ways in which the improvements and inventions mentioned by Emerson have been superseded by others; give the reasons.
"Unless above himself he can Erect himself, how poor a thing is man!" SAMUEL DANIEL.
Plato was a famous Greek philosopher who flourished in the fourth century before Christ.
He was the disciple of Socrates, the teacher of Aristotle, and the founder of the academic school of philosophy.
His exposition of idealism was founded on the teachings of Socrates.
Aristotle, another famous Greek philosopher, was for twenty years the pupil of Plato.
George Berkeley was a British clergyman of the eighteenth century.
Boundaries or marks to indicate boundaries.
In Roman mythology, Terminus was the god who presided over boundaries or landmarks.
On the day of Pentecost, the Holy Spirit descended upon the infant Christian church, with the gift of tongues.
Of Carthage, a famous ancient city, and state of northern Africa.
Emerson always urged that in order to get the best from all, one must pass from affairs to thought, society to solitude, books to nature.
It is remarked of Emerson that the idea of the symbolism of nature which he received from Plato, was the source of much of his pleasure in Swedenborg, the Swedish mystic philosopher.
A doctrine held by a follower of Pyrrho, a Greek philosopher of the third century before Christ, who founded the sceptical school.
An Englishman of the middle classes who became the military and civil leader of the English Revolution of the seventeenth century.
Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark.
Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark.
If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy.
